Abstract,Classification
"Mapping the functional landscape of frequent phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotypes promotes personalised medicine in phenylketonuria. || Europe Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Middle East Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Precision Medicine || In phenylketonuria, genetic heterogeneity, frequent compound heterozygosity, and the lack of functional data for phenylalanine hydroxylase genotypes hamper reliable phenotype prediction and individualised treatment. A literature search revealed 690 different phenylalanine hydroxylase genotypes in 3066 phenylketonuria patients from Europe and the Middle East. We determined phenylalanine hydroxylase function of 30 frequent homozygous and compound heterozygous genotypes covering 55% of the study population, generated activity landscapes, and assessed the phenylalanine hydroxylase working range in the metabolic (phenylalanine) and therapeutic (tetrahydrobiopterin) space. Shared patterns in genotype-specific functional landscapes were linked to biochemical and pharmacological phenotypes, where (1) residual activity below 3.5% was associated with classical phenylketonuria unresponsive to pharmacological treatment; (2) lack of defined peak activity induced loss of response to tetrahydrobiopterin; (3) a higher cofactor need was linked to inconsistent clinical phenotypes and low rates of tetrahydrobiopterin response; and (4) residual activity above 5%, a defined peak of activity, and a normal cofactor need were associated with pharmacologically treatable mild phenotypes. In addition, we provide a web application for retrieving country-specific information on genotypes and genotype-specific phenylalanine hydroxylase function that warrants continuous extension, updates, and research on demand. The combination of genotype-specific functional analyses with biochemical, clinical, and therapeutic data of individual patients may serve as a powerful tool to enable phenotype prediction and to establish personalised medicine strategies for dietary regimens and pharmacological treatment in phenylketonuria.",3 1 0
"The mutant genotype is the main determinant of the metabolic phenotype in phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. || Alleles Amino Acid Substitution Animals COS Cells Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic Genotype Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Phenylketonuria and mild hyperphenylalaninemias are allelic disorders caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. Following identification of the disease-causing mutation in 11 PAH-deficient patients, we tested the activity of the mutant gene products in an eukaryotic expression system. Two mutations markedly reduced PAH activity (A259V and L333F), one mutation mildly altered the enzyme activity (E390G), while the majority of mutant genotypes reduced the in vitro expression of PAH activity to 15-30% of controls. Comparing the predicted residual activity derived from expression studies to the clinical phenotypes of our PAH-deficient patients, we found that homozygosity for the L333F and E390G mutations resulted in severe and mild PAH deficiencies, respectively, both in vivo and in vitro, while compound heterozygosity (L333F/E390G) resulted in an intermediate dietary tolerance. Similarly, in vitro expression studies largely predicted dietary tolerance in compound heterozygotes for the A259V/IVS12nt1 (typical PKU), A259V/A403V, G218V/I65T, and G218V/R158Q mutations (mild variants). Taken together, these results support the view that expression studies are useful in predicting residual enzyme activity and that the mutant genotype at the PAH locus is the major determinant of metabolic phenotype in hyperphenylalaninemias.",3 1 0
"Correlation between genotype and the tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive phenotype in Chinese patients with phenylketonuria. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Biopterin China DNA Mutational Analysis Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Predictive Value of Tests || A growing body of research has suggested that tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) responsive phenotype can be predicted by the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotype in patients with phenylketonuria (PKU), but data concerning the association between genotype and BH4 responsiveness are scarce in China. A total of 165 PKU patients from China who had undergone a 24-h loading test with BH4 administration were recruited. Genotyping was performed by the next-generation sequencing (NGS) technique. Using the predicted residual PAH activity, we analyzed the association between genotype and BH4-responsiveness. Among the 165 patients, 40 patients (24.24%) responded to BH4. A total of 74 distinct mutations were observed, including 13 novel mutations. The mutation p.R241C was most frequently associated with response. Two known mutations (p.A322T and p.Q419R) and two novel mutations (p.L98V and IVS3-2A>T) were first reported as responsive to BH4. Residual PAH activity of at least 12.5% was needed for responsive genotypes. Genotype-based predictions of BH4-responsiveness are only for selecting potential responders. Accordingly, it is necessary to test potential responders with a long-term BH4 challenge.",3 1
"Mutations in exon 3 of the PAH gene causing mild hyperphenylalaninemia. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Female Genotype Humans Infant Male Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Phenylketonuria (PKU), an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), is clinically very heterogeneous. On molecular level more than 350 mutations in the PAH gene are known to date, which in different genotype combinations could account for biochemical and clinical variability. Mutations located in exon 3 coding for a part of the regulatory domain of the PAH enzyme cause classical PKU, mild PKU, and mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP). We describe the phenotypic effects of seven mutations in exon 3 of the PAH gene (R68G, R68S, R71H, S87R, P89S, I95F, and A104D). We propose that mutations located between amino acid positions 71 through 94 cause MHP.",2 1 3
"Long term clinical history of an Italian cohort of infantile onset Pompe disease treated with enzyme replacement therapy. || Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Italy Male Recombinant Proteins Retrospective Studies alpha-Glucosidases || Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has deeply modified the clinical history of Infantile Onset Pompe Disease (IOPD). However, its long-term effectiveness is still not completely defined. Available data shows a close relationship between clinical outcome and patients' cross-reactive immunological status (CRIM), being CRIM-negative status a negative prognostic factor. At the same time limited data are available on the long-term treatment in CRIM-positive infants. A retrospective multicentre observational study was designed to analyse the long-term effectiveness of ERT in IOPD. Thirteen Italian centres spread throughout the country were involved and a cohort of 28 patients (15 females, 13 males, born in the period: February 2002-January 2013) was enrolled. IOPD diagnosis was based on clinical symptoms, enzymatic and molecular analysis. All patients received ERT within the first year of life. Clinical, laboratory, and functional data (motor, cardiac and respiratory) were collected and followed for a median period of 71 months (5 years 11 months). Median age at onset, diagnosis and start of ERT were 2, 3 and 4 months, respectively. CRIM status was available for 24/28 patients: 17/24 (71%) were CRIM-positive. Nineteen patients (67%) survived > 2 years: 4 were CRIM-negative, 14 CRIM-positive and one unknown. Six patients (5 CRIM-positive and one unknown) never needed ventilation support (21,4%) and seven (6 CRIM-positive and one unknown: 25%) developed independent ambulation although one subsequently lost this function. Brain imaging study was performed in 6 patients and showed peri-ventricular white matter abnormalities in all of them. Clinical follow-up confirmed the better prognosis for CRIM-positive patients, though a slow, progressive worsening of motor and/or respiratory functions was detected in 8 patients. These data are the result of the longest independent retrospective study on ERT in IOPD reported so far outside clinical trials. The data obtained confirmed the better outcome of the CRIM-positive patients but at the same time, showed the inability of the current therapeutic approach to reverse or stabilize the disease progression. The results also evidenced the involvement of central nervous system in Pompe disease. To better understand the disease clinical history and to improve treatment efficacy larger multicentre studies are needed as well as the development of new therapeutic approaches.",1 0
"[Clinical manifestations, course and outcome of enzyme replacement therapy in Hungarian patients with Pompe's disease]. || Adult Age of Onset Carbon Dioxide Child Child, Preschool Disease Progression Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Forced Expiratory Volume Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Hungary Male Middle Aged Oxygen Phenotype Respiratory Insufficiency Time Factors alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe's disease is an autosomal recessive disease caused by deficiency of acid-alpha-glucosidase. Authors analyzed the phenotype of 11 Hungarian patients with Pompe's disease and evaluated clinical parameters and response to enzyme replacement therapy during a long-term follow-up in 8 patients. One patient with atypical infantile form presented with cardiomyopathy and a very slow progression of motor deficits; after 2 years of enzyme replacement therapy no disability was present at the age 6 years. Another patient was asymptomatic at the age of 2.5 years. The adult onset form was characterized by slight to prominent limb-girdle myopathy with an age of onset between 20 and 50 years. In 3 of such cases respiratory insufficiency was also present. Hungarian patients with Pompe's disease presented with a wide phenotypic variability ranging from atypical early childhood form with slowly progressive course to late-onset limb-girdle myopathy with variable courses. Enzyme replacement therapy resulted in significant improvement in motor and respiratory functions in most of the patients.",1
"Effect of enzyme therapy and prognostic factors in 69 adults with Pompe disease: an open-label single-center study. || Adult Aged Cohort Studies Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal Prognosis Respiration, Artificial Respiratory Function Tests alpha-Glucosidases || Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) in adults with Pompe disease, a progressive neuromuscular disorder, is of promising but variable efficacy. We investigated whether it alters the course of disease, and also identified potential prognostic factors. Patients in this open-label single-center study were treated biweekly with 20 mg/kg alglucosidase alfa. Muscle strength, muscle function, and pulmonary function were assessed every 3-6 months and analyzed using repeated-measures ANOVA. Sixty-nine patients (median age 52.1 years) were followed for a median of 23 months. Muscle strength increased after start of ERT (manual muscle testing 1.4 percentage points per year (pp/y); hand-held dynamometry 4.0 pp/y; both p < 0.001). Forced vital capacity (FVC) remained stable when measured in upright, but declined in supine position (-1.1 pp/y; p = 0.03). Muscle function did not improve in all patients (quick motor function test 0.7 pp/y; p = 0.14), but increased significantly in wheelchair-independent patients and those with mild and moderate muscle weakness.Relative to the pre-treatment period (49 patients with 14 months pre-ERT and 22 months ERT median follow-up), ERT affected muscle strength positively (manual muscle testing +3.3 pp/y, p < 0.001 and hand-held dynamometry +7.9 pp/y, p < 0.001). Its effect on upright FVC was +1.8 pp/y (p = 0.08) and on supine FVC +0.8 (p = 0.38). Favorable prognostic factors were female gender for muscle strength, and younger age and better clinical status for supine FVC. We conclude that ERT positively alters the natural course of Pompe disease in adult patients; muscle strength increased and upright FVC stabilized. Functional outcome is probably best when ERT intervention is timely.",1
"Fast clinical molecular diagnosis of hyperphenylalaninemia using next-generation sequencing-based on a custom AmpliSeq™ panel and Ion Torrent PGM sequencing. || Base Sequence Frameshift Mutation High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Hydro-Lyases Infant, Newborn Mutation Neonatal Screening Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Sequence Analysis, DNA Sequence Deletion || Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) can be classified into phenylketonuria (PKU) and tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency (BH4D), according to the defect of enzyme activity, both of which vary substantially in severity, treatment, and prognosis of the disease. To set up a fast and comprehensive assay in order to achieve early etiological diagnosis and differential diagnosis for children with HPA, we designed a custom AmpliSeq™ panel for the sequencing of coding DNA sequence (CDS), flanking introns, 5' untranslated region (UTR) and 3' UTR from five HPA-causing genes (PAH, PTS, QDPR, GCH1, and PCBD1) using the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM) Sequencer. A standard group of 15 samples with previously known DNA sequences and a test group of 37 HPA patients with unknown mutations were used for assay validation and application, respectively. All variations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. In the standard group, all the known mutations were detected and were consistent with the results of previous Sanger sequencing. In the test group, we identified mutations in 71 of 74 alleles, with a mutation detection rate of 95.9%. We also found a frame shift deletion p.Ile25Metfs*13 in PAH that was previously unreported. In addition, 1 of 37 in the test group was inconsistent with either the molecular diagnosis or clinical diagnosis by traditional differential methods. In conclusion, our comprehensive assay based on a custom AmpliSeq™ panel and Ion Torrent PGM sequencing has wider coverage, higher throughput, is much faster, and more efficient when compared with the traditional molecular detection method for HPA patients, which could meet the medical need for individualized diagnosis and treatment.",3 1
"Infantile-onset Pompe disease: A case series highlighting early clinical features, spectrum of disease severity and treatment response. ||  || Pompe disease is a rare, autosomal, recessive disorder. Alterations in the gene encoding lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase cause impaired glycogen degradation and resultant lysosomal glycogen accumulation. Classic infantile-onset Pompe disease (IPD) manifests soon after birth, severe cases have complete/near complete enzyme deficiency. IPD is associated with a broad spectrum of non-specific clinical features, and diagnostic delays are common. Without treatment, death typically occurs within the first 2 years of life. We present case experiences to help expand paediatricians' understanding of factors contributing to diagnostic delay, clinical decline and to highlight the need for timely therapy. Data were extracted from IPD cases managed at our hospital. Key aspects of clinical presentation, diagnosis, genetic variations, management and overall outcomes were collated then compared with what is already known in the literature. We report four IPD cases (three female). Two patients were cross-reactive immunological material negative. Age at symptom onset was 3-9 months, presenting clinical features were varied, and confirmatory diagnosis was significantly delayed in one patient. In concert with the literature, cardiomegaly, ventricular hypertrophy and delayed developmental milestones were seen in all four cases. Our cases demonstrate a range of disease severity, response to enzyme replacement therapy and antibody development. Significant immune responses were seen in two cases (one cross-reactive immunological material positive); despite immunomodulation therapy, both were associated with fatal outcomes. Timely diagnosis and initiation of enzyme replacement therapy is critical to patient outcomes as IPD progresses rapidly and irreversible changes in clinical status may occur during the delay.",1 0
"Improvement of dysphagia in a child affected by Pompe disease treated with enzyme replacement therapy. || Child Deglutition Disorders Enzyme Replacement Therapy Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Severity of Illness Index alpha-Glucosidases || Dysphagia is a known complication in Pompe Disease (PD), a severe metabolic myopathy due to alpha-glucosidase deficiency. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with alglucosidase alfa is the only approved therapy for PD. Presently no data are available on the effects of ERT on dysphagia in PD patients. The aim of this work is to evaluate the course of this complication in a 6 years old boy affected by PD after treatment with ERT. Dysphagia was assessed by Videofluoroscopic Swallowing Study (VFSS) at baseline, before the start of ERT and after 36 months of therapy. We used the Dysphagia Severity Rating Scale (DSS) to define the severity grade of dysphagia. VFSS performed at baseline revealed complete incoordination of oral stage swallowing which was classified as a grade 1 dysphagia according to DSS. After 36 months of treatment VFSS revealed normal swallowing, classified as grade 0 by DSS. Our results suggest that ERT is effective in improving dysphagia. VFSS may be a useful tool to investigate and monitor swallowing disorders in patients affected by PD.",1
"CDH23 mutation and phenotype heterogeneity: a profile of 107 diverse families with Usher syndrome and nonsyndromic deafness. || Adolescent Adult Aged Amino Acid Sequence Cadherins Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Deafness Female Genetic Heterogeneity Humans Infant Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype Retinitis Pigmentosa Sequence Alignment Syndrome Vestibular Function Tests || Usher syndrome type I is characterized by congenital hearing loss, retinitis pigmentosa (RP), and variable vestibular areflexia. Usher syndrome type ID, one of seven Usher syndrome type I genetic localizations, have been mapped to a chromosomal interval that overlaps with a nonsyndromic-deafness localization, DFNB12. Mutations in CDH23, a gene that encodes a putative cell-adhesion protein with multiple cadherin-like domains, are responsible for both Usher syndrome and DFNB12 nonsyndromic deafness. Specific CDH23 mutational defects have been identified that differentiate these two phenotypes. Only missense mutations of CDH23 have been observed in families with nonsyndromic deafness, whereas nonsense, frameshift, splice-site, and missense mutations have been identified in families with Usher syndrome. In the present study, a panel of 69 probands with Usher syndrome and 38 probands with recessive nonsyndromic deafness were screened for the presence of mutations in the entire coding region of CDH23, by heteroduplex, single-strand conformation polymorphism, and direct sequence analyses. A total of 36 different CDH23 mutations were detected in 45 families; 33 of these mutations were novel, including 18 missense, 3 nonsense, 5 splicing defects, 5 microdeletions, and 2 insertions. A total of seven mutations were common to more than one family. Numerous exonic and intronic polymorphisms also were detected. Results of ophthalmologic examinations of the patients with nonsyndromic deafness have found asymptomatic RP-like manifestations, indicating that missense mutations may have a subtle effect in the retina. Furthermore, patients with mutations in CDH23 display a wide range of hearing loss and RP phenotypes, differing in severity, age at onset, type, and the presence or absence of vestibular areflexia.",1
"Spectrum and frequency of GJB2 mutations causing deafness in the northwest of Iran. || Alleles Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Connexin 26 Connexins Deafness Female Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Incidence Infant Iran Male Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction || Mutations in GJB2 and GJB6 which comprise DFNB1 locus cause up to half of all cases of the prelingual autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) worldwide. This study has intended to assess the spectrum and frequency of GJB2/GJB6 mutations in northwest of Iran. 508 Patients with presumed ARNSHL were analyzed by applying ARMS-PCR, SSCP, PCR-RFLP and sequencing assays. Seventy-five (14.7%) different homozygous and eighty-seven (17.1%) different compound heterozygous genotypes were detected in this cohort. Concerning the GJB2 gene, c.35delG was the most prevalent mutation, accounting for 16.4% of the samples. In addition 29 sequence variations other than c.35delG mutation were distinguished in GJB2; namely, delE120, Ins A 290-291, R143Q, V37I, R32H, Y155X, V27I + T123N, F154F, 167delT, 312del14, 299-300delA, T8M, W24X, E114G + V27I, 235delC, R184P, V153I, S139N, A171T, M163V (unknown mutation), G127V, E147X, R127H, 35insG, R143W, V27I, G160S, E114G and IVS1 + 1G > A. Moreover, the IVS1 + 1G > A was accounted as a second common mutation. Overall, the frequency of GJB2 mutations (≥31%) is in agreement with other white population. These findings highlight the importance of the study of GJB2 gene in the diagnosis to provide early treatment and genetic counseling.",1
"Late onset Pompe disease: clinical and neurophysiological spectrum of 38 patients including long-term follow-up in 18 patients. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Child Child, Preschool Disease Progression Electromyography Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Longitudinal Studies Male Middle Aged Muscle Weakness Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle Respiration Disorders Retrospective Studies || To describe the clinical and neurophysiological spectrum and prognosis in a large cohort of biochemically and genetically proven late onset Pompe patients. Thirty-eight diagnosed with late onset Pompe disease at our neuromuscular department during 1985 and 2006 are described in detail. The mean delay from onset of symptoms or first medical consultation until diagnosis was 10.4 and 7.1 years, respectively. A different diagnosis was suggested in 11 of 38 patients. Ten patients underwent repeated muscle biopsies before diagnosis of Pompe disease was established. Limb girdle weakness was the most frequent presenting sign. Six patients complained of myalgia. Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome was found in 3 of 38 patients. Respiratory failure preceded the onset of overt limb muscle weakness in three patients. The course of the patients was progressive in all, but there was a wide variety of progression, which did not correlate with the age of disease onset. In 71% of the patients, neurophysiological investigations revealed a myopathic EMG pattern, half of the patients had spontaneous activity including complex repetitive discharges. A normal EMG was found in 9% of the patients. Nerve conduction studies were normal in all. Pompe disease should be taken into consideration in patients with unexplained limb girdle muscular weakness with respiratory failure. Cardiac manifestations may not be restricted to infantile Pompe disease.",1
"Transcriptional response to GAA deficiency (Pompe disease) in infantile-onset patients. || Age of Onset Child Child, Preschool Female Gene Expression Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Muscle, Skeletal Phenotype Transcription, Genetic alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is a genetic disorder resulting from a deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) that manifests as a clinical spectrum with regard to symptom severity and rate of progression. In this study, we used microarrays to examine gene expression from the muscle of two cohorts of infantile-onset Pompe patients to identify transcriptional differences that may contribute to the disease phenotype. We found strong similarities among the gene expression profiles generated from biceps and quadriceps, and identified a number of signaling pathways altered in both cohorts. We also found that infantile-onset Pompe patient muscle had a gene expression pattern characteristic of immature or regenerating muscle, and exhibited many transcriptional markers of inflammation, despite having few overt signs of inflammatory infiltrate. Further, we identified genes exhibiting correlation between expression at baseline and response to therapy. This combined dataset can serve as a foundation for biological discovery and biomarker development to improve the treatment of Pompe disease.",1 4
"Identification of a missense mutation in one allele of a patient with Pompe disease, and use of endonuclease digestion of PCR-amplified RNA to demonstrate lack of mRNA expression from the second allele. || Base Sequence Blotting, Southern Cell Line Cloning, Molecular Endonucleases European Continental Ancestry Group Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Methionine Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Protein Conformation Threonine alpha-Glucosidases || Infantile-onset glycogen storage disease type II, or Pompe disease, results from a genetic deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme acid alpha glucosidase (GAA). Sequencing of the cDNA from a cell line (GM 244) derived from a patient with Pompe disease demonstrated a T953-to-C transition that predicted a methionine-to-threonine substitution at codon 318. The basepair substitution resulted in loss of restriction-endonuclease sites for NcoI and StyI. Analysis of genomic DNA revealed both a normal and an abnormal NcoI fragment, indicating that the patient was a genetic compound. NcoI and StyI digestion of cDNA, amplified by PCR from reverse-transcribed RNA, demonstrated that greater than 95% of the GAA mRNA in GM 244 was derived from the allele carrying the missense mutation. The missense mutation was uncommon, since it was not detected in 37 additional GAA-deficient chromosomes, as determined by digestion of genomic DNA with NcoI and hybridization. The amino acid substitution predicts a new potential site for N-linked glycosylation, as well as major changes in secondary structure of the protein. We could confirm that the mutation was responsible for the enzyme deficiency by demonstrating that a hybrid minigene containing the mutation did not express GAA enzyme activity after transient gene expression. We have therefore now provided the first identification of a single-basepair missense mutation in a patient with Pompe disease and furthermore have demonstrated that the patient is a genetic compound with the second allele barely expressing mRNA.",1 0
"Enrichment of LOVD-USHbases with 152 USH2A genotypes defines an extensive mutational spectrum and highlights missense hotspots. || Adult DNA Mutational Analysis Extracellular Matrix Proteins Genotyping Techniques Humans Mutation Usher Syndromes || Alterations of USH2A, encoding usherin, are responsible for more than 70% of cases of Usher syndrome type II (USH2), a recessive disorder that combines moderate to severe hearing loss and retinal degeneration. The longest USH2A transcript encodes usherin isoform b, a 5,202-amino-acid transmembrane protein with an exceptionally large extracellular domain consisting notably of a Laminin N-terminal domain and numerous Laminin EGF-like (LE) and Fibronectin type III (FN3) repeats. Mutations of USH2A are scattered throughout the gene and mostly private. Annotating these variants is therefore of major importance to correctly assign pathogenicity. We have extensively genotyped a novel cohort of 152 Usher patients and identified 158 different mutations, of which 93 are newly described. Pooling this new data with the existing pathogenic variants already incorporated in USHbases reveals several previously unappreciated features of the mutational spectrum. We show that parts of the protein are more likely to tolerate single amino acid variations, whereas others constitute pathogenic missense hotspots. We have found, in repeated LE and FN3 domains, a nonequal distribution of the missense mutations that highlights some crucial positions in usherin with possible consequences for the assessment of the pathogenicity of the numerous missense variants identified in USH2A.",1
"SLC26A4 gene is frequently involved in nonsyndromic hearing impairment with enlarged vestibular aqueduct in Caucasian populations. || Adolescent Adult Alleles Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Connexin 26 Connexins Deafness European Continental Ancestry Group Female Goiter Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Homozygote Humans Infant Male Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Prevalence Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Vestibular Aqueduct || Sensorineural hearing loss is the most frequent sensory deficit of childhood and is of genetic origin in up to 75% of cases. It has been shown that mutations of the SLC26A4 (PDS) gene were involved in syndromic deafness characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing impairment and goitre (Pendred's syndrome), as well as in congenital isolated deafness (DFNB4). While the prevalence of SLC26A4 mutations in Pendred's syndrome is clearly established, it remains to be studied in large cohorts of patients with nonsyndromic deafness and detailed clinical informations. In this report, 109 patients from 100 unrelated families, aged from 1 to 32 years (median age: 10 years), with nonsyndromic deafness and enlarged vestibular aqueduct, were genotyped for SLC26A4 using DHPLC molecular screening and sequencing. In all, 91 allelic variants were observed in 100 unrelated families, of which 19 have never been reported. The prevalence of SLC26A4 mutations was 40% (40/100), with biallelic mutation in 24% (24/100), while six families were homozygous. All patients included in this series had documented deafness, associated with EVA and without any evidence of syndromic disease. Among patients with SLC26A4 biallelic mutations, deafness was more severe, fluctuated more than in patients with no mutation. In conclusion, the incidence of SLC26A4 mutations is high in patients with isolated deafness and enlarged vestibular aqueduct and could represent up to 4% of nonsyndromic hearing impairment. SLC26A4 could be the second most frequent gene implicated in nonsyndromic deafness after GJB2, in this Caucasian population.",3 1 4
"Molecular basis of phenylketonuria and a correlation between genotype and phenotype in a heterogeneous southeastern US population. || Alleles Base Sequence Ethnic Groups Europe Forecasting Gene Expression Regulation Genetics, Population Genotype Georgia Heterozygote Humans Infant, Newborn Molecular Biology Mutation Neonatal Screening Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Sequence Analysis || To determine the molecular basis of phenylketonuria (PKU) and related hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) and to establish correlations between phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotypes and biochemical and clinical phenotypes in an ethnically diverse US population, PAH genotypes were determined in 35 patients with PKU or HPA and 1 carrier from the Medical Genetics Clinic of the Emory University School of Medicine. Patients were identified through Georgia's population-based newborn screening program. PAH genotypes in these individuals were determined from dried blood spots or whole-blood samples using a combination of polymerase chain reaction-mediated amplification, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, and direct-sequence analysis. The phenotypic severity of patients with PKU and HPA was based on pretreatment serum phenylalanine (PHE) levels during the neonatal period and on dietary tolerance of PHE later in life. Sixty-eight (96%) of 71 mutant alleles were identified. Major mutations in this population included R408W (11 of 71), I65T (11 of 71), Y414C (6 of 71), L348V (4 of 71), and IVS10 (4 of 71). Five new nucleotide substitutions, E76A (1 of 71), R241L (1 of 71), Q304R (2 of 71), C334S (1 of 71), and R400R (2 of 71) were also detected. Thirty-two of the thirty-five nonrelated patients examined in this study were completely genotyped. Strong correlations were observed between the level of PAH activity predicted from the genotype, when known from previous in vitro expression studies of the mutant proteins, and pretreatment serum PHE levels (r = .841) or clinical severity (Kendall rank-order correlation coefficient, .936). These results demonstrate strong correlations between PAH genotype and biochemical and clinical phenotypes in this heterogeneous American sample population, extending our previous findings from relatively homogeneous European populations. These correlations further demonstrate the clinical utility of genotype analysis in the treatment of patients with PKU and HPA.",3 1
"Molecular genetics of PKU in Poland and potential impact of mutations on BH4 responsiveness. ||  || Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) has been recently approved as a treatment of patients with phenylketonuria. However, as a confirmation of BH4-responsiveness, it might require a very expensive trial treatment with BH4 or prolonged BH4-loading procedures. The selection of patients eligible for BH4-therapy by means of genotyping of the PAH gene mutations may be recommended as a complementary approach. A population-wide genotyping study was carried out in 1286 Polish phenyloketonuria-patients. The aim was to estimate the BH4 demand and to cover prospectively the treatment by a National Health Fund. A total of 95 types of mutations were identified. Genetic variants corresponding with probable BH4-responsiveness were found in 28.2% of cases. However, patients with mild or classical phenylketonuria who require continuous treatment accounted for 11.4% of the studied population only. Analysis of the published data shows similar percentage of the ""BH4-responsive"" variants of a PAH gene in patients from other countries of Eastern Europe. Therefore, it can be concluded, that the proportion of phenylketonuria-patients who could benefit from the use of BH4 reaches approximately 10% in the entire region.",3 1
"Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in south Italy: Genotype-phenotype correlations, identification of a novel mutant PAH allele and prediction of BH4 responsiveness. || Adolescent Adult Alleles Biopterin Child Child, Preschool DNA Diet Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Infant Italy Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylketonurias Prognosis Treatment Outcome Young Adult || We investigated the mutation spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) in a cohort of patients from 33 Italian PKU families. Mutational screening of the known coding region, including conventional intron splice sites, was performed by direct sequencing of the patients' genomic DNA. Thirty-three different disease causing mutations were identified in our patient group, including 19 missense, 6 splicing, 3 nonsense, 5 deletions, with a detection rate of 100%. The most prevalent mutation was the IVS10-11G>A, accounting for 12.1% of PKU alleles studied. Other frequent mutations were: p.R261Q (9.1%), p.P281L (7.6%), and p.R408W (6.1%). We also identified one novel missense mutation, p.H290Q. A spectrum of 31 different genotypes was observed and a genotype based predictions of BH4-responsiveness were assessed. Among all genotypes, 13 were predicted to be BH4-responsive represented by thirteen PKU families. In addition, genotype-phenotype correlations were performed. This study reveals the importance of a full genotyping of PKU patients and the prediction of BH4-responsiveness, not only because of the definitive diagnosis and prediction of the optimal diet, but also to point out those patients that could benefit from new therapeutic approach. They may potentially benefit from BH4 therapy which, combined with a less strict diet, or eventually in special cases as monotherapy, may contribute to reduce nutritional deficiencies and minimize neurological and psychological dysfunctions.",1
"Long-term treatment with tetrahydrobiopterin in phenylketonuria: treatment strategies and prediction of long-term responders. || Adolescent Biomarkers, Pharmacological Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Disease Management Drug Administration Schedule Female Humans Long-Term Care Male Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Prognosis Tyrosine || Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) responsive phenylketonuria has been described more than 10 years ago. However, criteria for the identification of long-term BH4 responsive patients are not yet established. 116 patients with phenylketonuria, aged 4-18 years, were screened for potential long-term BH4 responsiveness by at least two of the following criteria: positive neonatal BH4 loading test, putative BH4 responsive genotype, and/or milder phenotype. Patients had to be on permanent dietary treatment. 23 patients fulfilled these criteria and were tested for long-term BH4 responsiveness: 18/23 were long-term BH4 responsive, 5/23 were not. On long-term BH4 treatment over a period of 48 ± 27 months in a dose of 14.9 ± 3.3mg/kg/day phenylalanine tolerance was increased from 452 ± 201 mg/day to 1593 ± 647 mg/day, corresponding to a mean increase of 1141 ± 528 mg/day. Dietary phenylalanine intake was increased stepwise according to a clear defined protocol. In 8/18 patients, diet was completely liberalized; 10/18 patients still received phenylalanine-free amino acid formula with 0.63 ± 0.23 g/kg/day. The most predictive value for long-term BH4 responsiveness was the combination of pretreatment phenylalanine of < 1200 μmol/L, pretreatment phenylalanine/tyrosine ratio of <15, phenylalanine/tyrosine ratio of <15 on treatment, phenylalanine tolerance of >20mg/kg/day at age 3 years, positive neonatal BH4 loading, and at least one putative BH4 responsive mutation (p = 0.00024). Our data show that long-term BH4 responsiveness may be predicted already during neonatal period by determining maximum pretreatment phenylalanine and phenylalanine/tyrosine concentrations, neonatal BH4 loading and PAH genotype. A clear defined protocol is necessary to install long-term BH4 treatment.",3 1
"Identification of SLC26A4 mutations in patients with hearing loss and enlarged vestibular aqueduct using high-resolution melting curve analysis. || Cholestasis Female Forkhead Transcription Factors Goiter, Nodular Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Pneumonia Polymerase Chain Reaction Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Sequence Analysis, DNA Sulfate Transporters Transition Temperature Vestibular Aqueduct || Mutations in the SLC26A4 gene can cause both Pendred syndrome and nonsyndromic enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct, two conditions associated with sensorineural hearing loss. We analyzed the SLC26A4 gene in 44 hearing-impaired patients by nested polymerase chain reaction followed by high-resolution melt analysis. We also used this approach to scan for mutations in KCNJ10 and FOXI1, two genes reported to play a role in the pathogenesis of Pendred syndrome and enlarged vestibular aqueduct. Seven patients with known SLC26A4 mutations were included as controls. All previously identified mutations were detected by high-resolution melt analysis. Of the patients with no known mutations, we detected two SLC26A4 mutations in 5 probands (12%), one mutation in 9 probands (21%), and no mutations in 29 probands (67%). We identified two novel SLC26A4 mutations, p.T485M and p.F718S, and found no evidence of a digenic contribution of KCNJ10 and FOXI1 mutations.",1
"Long-term follow-up of patients with phenylketonuria treated with tetrahydrobiopterin: a seven years experience. || Adolescent Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Drug Administration Schedule Female Genotype Humans Male Phenylalanine Phenylketonurias Young Adult || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by the deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase that catalyzes the conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine, using tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) as coenzyme. Besides dietary phenylalanine restriction, new therapeutic options are emerging, such as the treatment with BH4 in subgroups of PKU patients responding to a loading test with BH4. A no-profit open-label interventional trial with long-term oral BH4 therapy, sponsored by the Italian Medicines Agency (AIFA), was performed in a group of 17 PKU patients resulted as BH4 responders among 46 subjects analyzed for BH4-responsiveness (prot. FARM5MATC7). We report on efficacy and safety data of BH4 therapy and analyze factors predicting BH4-responsiveness and long-term response to BH4. A BH4-withdrawal test was used as a proof of the efficacy of long-term therapy with BH4. Forty-four percent of the patients responded to the 48 h-long loading test with BH4. All the phenotypic classes were represented. Genotype was the best predictor of responsiveness, along with lower phenylalanine levels at diagnosis, higher tolerance and lower phenylalanine/tyrosine ratio before the test. In BH4 responder patients, long-term BH4 therapy resulted safe and effective in increasing tolerance while maintaining a good metabolic control. The BH4 withdrawal test, performed in a subset of patients, showed that improved tolerance was directly dependent on BH4 assumption. Tolerance to phenylalanine was re-evaluated in 43.5% of patients and was longitudinally analyzed in 5 patients. Long-term treatment with BH4 is safe and effective in increasing tolerance to phenylalanine. There is real need to assess the actual tolerance to phenylalanine in PKU patients to ameliorate quality of life, improve nutritional status, avoiding unnecessarily restricted diets, and interpret the effects of new therapies for PKU.",1
"Prenatal diagnosis of Pompe disease: enzyme assay or molecular testing? ||  || We report two cases which illustrate that enzyme assay results alone, may at times be equivocal and inconclusive in the prenatal diagnosis of storage disorders like Pompe disease and therefore, if the probands mutation is known, targeted mutation analysis of fetal DNA is the most reliable method for fetal evaluation.",1
"USH2A mutation analysis in 70 Dutch families with Usher syndrome type II. ||  || Usher syndrome type II (USH2) is characterised by moderate to severe high-frequency hearing impairment, progressive visual loss due to retinitis pigmentosa and intact vestibular responses. Three loci are known for USH2, however, only the gene for USH2a (USH2A) has been identified. Mutation analysis of USH2A was performed in 70 Dutch USH2 families. Ten mutations in USH2A were detected, of which three are novel, c.949C>A, c.2242C>T (p.Gln748X) and c.4405C>T (p.Gln1468X). Including 9 previously published Dutch USH2a families, estimates of the prevalence of USH2a in the Dutch USH2 population were made. Mutations were identified in 62% of the families. In 28% both mutated alleles were identified, whereas in 34% the mutation in only one allele was found. It is estimated that about 28% of the Dutch USH2 families have a different causative gene. Analysis of deduced haplotypes suggests that c.1256G>T (p.Cys419Phe) is a Dutch ancestral mutation, occurring in 16% of the alleles.",2 1 3
"The landscape of genetic diseases in Saudi Arabia based on the first 1000 diagnostic panels and exomes. || Consanguinity Exome Female Genetic Diseases, Inborn Genetic Testing Genome, Human High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Homozygote Humans Male Molecular Sequence Annotation Morbidity Mutation Phenotype Reproducibility of Results Saudi Arabia Sequence Analysis, DNA || In this study, we report the experience of the only reference clinical next-generation sequencing lab in Saudi Arabia with the first 1000 families who span a wide-range of suspected Mendelian phenotypes. A total of 1019 tests were performed in the period of March 2016-December 2016 comprising 972 solo (index only), 14 duo (parents or affected siblings only), and 33 trio (index and parents). Multigene panels accounted for 672 tests, while whole exome sequencing (WES) represented the remaining 347 tests. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants that explain the clinical indications were identified in 34% (27% in panels and 43% in exomes), spanning 279 genes and including 165 novel variants. While recessive mutations dominated the landscape of solved cases (71% of mutations, and 97% of which are homozygous), a substantial minority (27%) were solved on the basis of dominant mutations. The highly consanguineous nature of the study population also facilitated homozygosity for many private mutations (only 32.5% of the recessive mutations are founder), as well as the first instances of recessive inheritance of previously assumed strictly dominant disorders (involving ITPR1, VAMP1, MCTP2, and TBP). Surprisingly, however, dual molecular diagnosis was only observed in 1.5% of cases. Finally, we have encountered candidate variants in 75 genes (ABHD6, ACY3, ADGRB2, ADGRG7, AGTPBP1, AHNAK2, AKAP6, ASB3, ATXN1L, C17orf62, CABP1, CCDC186, CCP110, CLSTN2, CNTN3, CNTN5, CTNNA2, CWC22, DMAP1, DMKN, DMXL1, DSCAM, DVL2, ECI1, EP400, EPB41L5, FBXL22, GAP43, GEMIN7, GIT1, GRIK4, GRSF1, GTRP1, HID1, IFNL1, KCNC4, LRRC52, MAP7D3, MCTP2, MED26, MPP7, MRPS35, MTDH, MTMR9, NECAP2, NPAT, NRAP, PAX7, PCNX, PLCH2, PLEKHF1, PTPN12, QKI, RILPL2, RIMKLA, RIMS2, RNF213, ROBO1, SEC16A, SIAH1, SIRT2, SLAIN2, SLC22A20, SMDT1, SRRT, SSTR1, ST20, SYT9, TSPAN6, UBR4, VAMP4, VPS36, WDR59, WDYHV1, and WHSC1) not previously linked to human phenotypes and these are presented to accelerate post-publication matchmaking. Two of these genes were independently mutated in more than one family with similar phenotypes, which substantiates their link to human disease (AKAP6 in intellectual disability and UBR4 in early dementia). If the novel candidate disease genes in this cohort are independently confirmed, the yield of WES will have increased to 83%, which suggests that most ""negative"" clinical exome tests are unsolved due to interpretation rather than technical limitations.",1
"Contribution of SLC26A4 to the molecular diagnosis of nonsyndromic prelingual sensorineural hearing loss in a Brazilian cohort. || Adolescent Adult Brazil Child Child, Preschool Connexin 26 Connexins Female Hearing Loss Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Membrane Transport Proteins Middle Aged Mutation Sulfate Transporters Young Adult || Hereditary hearing loss (HL) is the most common sensorineural disorder in humans. Besides mutations in GJB2 and GJB6 genes, pathogenic variants in the SLC26A4 gene have been reported as a cause of hereditary HL due to its role in the physiology of the inner ear. In this research we wanted to investigate the prevalence of mutations in SLC26A4 in Brazilian patients with nonsyndromic prelingual sensorineural HL. We applied the high-resolution melting technique to screen 88 DNA samples from unrelated deaf individuals that were previously screened for GJB2, GJB6 and MT-RNR1 mutations. The frequency of mutations in the SLC26A4 gene was 28.4%. Two novel mutations were found: p.Ile254Val and p.Asn382Lys. The mutation c.-66C>G (rs17154282) in the promoter region of SLC26A4, was the most frequent mutation found and was significantly associated with nonsyndromic prelingual sensorineural HL. After mutations in the GJB2, GJB6 and mitochondrial genes, SLC26A4 mutations are considered the next most common cause of hereditary HL in Brazilian as well as in other populations, which corroborates with our data. Furthermore, we suggest the inclusion of the SCL26A4 gene in the investigation of hereditary HL since there was an increase in the frequency of the mutations found, up to 22.7%.",1
"Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II) in Argentineans: clinical manifestations and identification of 9 novel mutations. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Argentina Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a deficiency in 1,4-alpha-glucosidase (EC.3.2.1.3), the enzyme required to hydrolyze lysosomal glycogen to glucose. While previous studies have focused on Pompe patients from Europe, the United States, and Taiwan, we have analyzed a group of South American Pompe patients to better understand the molecular basis of their disease. From 14 Argentinean patients diagnosed with either infantile or late-onset disease, we identified 14 distinct mutations in the acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) gene including nine novel variants (c.236_246del, c.377G>A, c.1099T>C, c.1397T>G, c.1755-1G>A, c.1802C>G, c.1978C>T, c.2281delGinsAT, and c.2608C>T). Three different families displayed the c.377G>A allelic variant, suggesting a higher frequency among a subset of Argentineans. Comparison of patients with similar or identical variations in the GAA gene highlights the phenotypic diversity of late-onset disease and supports a role for other genetic and environmental factors in disease presentation.",3 1 4
"Long-term prognosis of patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease diagnosed by newborn screening and treated since birth. || Age of Onset Female Follow-Up Studies Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Incidence Infant Infant, Newborn Male Neonatal Screening Prognosis Prospective Studies Recombinant Proteins Survival Rate Taiwan Time Factors alpha-Glucosidases || To determine the benefit of newborn screening for the long-term prognosis of patients with classic infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD). A cohort of patients with classic IOPD were diagnosed by newborn screening, treated with recombinant human acid α-glucosidase (rhGAA), and followed prospectively. Outcome measurements included survival, left ventricular mass, serum creatinine kinase, motor function, mental development, and systemic manifestations. Ten patients who presented with left ventricular hypertrophy at diagnosis received rhGAA infusions starting at a median age of 16 days (6-34 days). All patients were cross-reactive immunologic material-positive. After a median treatment time of 63 months (range 28-90 months), all could walk independently, and none required mechanical ventilation. All patients had motor capability sufficient for participating in daily activities, but muscle weakness over the pelvic girdle appeared gradually after 2 years of age. Ptosis was present in one-half of the patients, and speech disorders were common. Anti-rhGAA antibody titers were low (median maximal titer value 1:1600, range: undetectable ∼ 1:12,800). By studying patients treated since birth who have no significant anti-rhGAA antibody interference, this prospective study demonstrates that the efficacy of rhGAA therapy is high and consistent for the treatment of classic IOPD. This study also exposes limitations of rhGAA treatment. The etiology of the manifestations in these early-treated patients will require further study.",3 1 4
"Congenital heart disease in maternal phenylketonuria: report from the Maternal PKU Collaborative Study. || Female Heart Defects, Congenital Humans Incidence Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Pregnancy Prospective Studies Ultrasonography, Prenatal United States || The frequency and types of congenital heart disease in offspring from pregnancies in women with hyperphenylalaninemia were examined in the international prospective Maternal Phenylketonuria Collaborative Study. Relationships of congenital heart disease in offspring to the basal blood phenylalanine level in the mother, metabolic control through diet during pregnancy, and phenylalanine hydroxylase mutations in mother and offspring were determined. The 416 offspring from 412 maternal phenylketonuria pregnancies that produced live births and 100 offspring from the 99 control pregnancies were included in this examination. Thirty-four of the 235 offspring (14%; 95% CI, 10.2 to 19.6%) from pregnancies in phenylketonuric women with a basal phenylalanine level > or = 900 microM (15 mg/dL) [normal blood phenylalanine < 120 microM (2 mg/dL)] and not in metabolic control [phenylalanine level < or = 600 microM (10 mg/dL)] by the eighth gestational week had congenital heart disease compared with one control offspring (1%) with congenital heart disease. One offspring among the 50 (2%) from mothers with non-phenylketonuria mild hyperphenylalaninemia also had congenital heart disease. Coarctation of the aorta and hypoplastic left heart syndrome were overrepresented compared with expected percentages among those with congenital heart disease in the general population. A basal maternal phenylalanine level > 1800 microM (30 mg/dL) significantly increased the risk for bearing a child with congenital heart disease (p = 0.003). Phenylalanine hydroxylase mutations in the mothers and offspring did not have an independent relationship to congenital heart disease but were related through the basal maternal phenylalanine levels. The data in this study indicate that a basal maternal phenylalanine level of 900 microM may be a threshold for congenital heart disease, that women with the most severe degree of phenylketonuria are at highest risk for bearing such a child, and that prevention of the congenital heart disease requires initiation of the low phenylalanine diet before conception or early in pregnancy with metabolic control no later than the eighth gestational week.",1
"Novel mutations in the long isoform of the USH2A gene in patients with Usher syndrome type II or non-syndromic retinitis pigmentosa. || Cohort Studies Computational Biology Extracellular Matrix Proteins Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Mutation Mutation, Missense Protein Isoforms Retinitis Pigmentosa Sequence Analysis, DNA Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome type II (USH2) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterised by retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and mild to moderate sensorineural hearing loss. Mutations in the USH2A gene are the most common cause of USH2 and are also a cause of some forms of RP without hearing loss (ie, non-syndromic RP). The USH2A gene was initially identified as a transcript comprised of 21 exons but subsequently a longer isoform containing 72 exons was identified. The 51 exons unique to the long isoform of USH2A were screened for mutations among a core set of 108 patients diagnosed with USH2 and 80 patients with non-syndromic RP who were all included in a previously reported screen of the short isoform of USH2A. For several exons, additional patients were screened. In total, 35 deleterious mutations were identified including 17 nonsense mutations, 9 frameshift mutations, 5 splice-site mutations, and 4 small in-frame deletions or insertions. Twenty-seven mutations were novel. In addition, 65 rare missense changes were identified. A method of classifying the deleterious effect of the missense changes was developed using the summed results of four different mutation assessment algorithms, SIFT, pMUT, PolyPhen, and AGVGD. This system classified 8 of the 65 changes as 'likely deleterious' and 9 as 'possibly deleterious'. At least one mutation was identified in 57-63% of USH2 cases and 19-23% of cases of non-syndromic recessive RP (calculated without and including probable/possible deleterious changes) thus supporting that USH2A is the most common known cause of RP in the USA.",1 0
"Characterization of Usher syndrome type I gene mutations in an Usher syndrome patient population. || Abnormalities, Multiple Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Carrier Proteins Cohort Studies Humans Mutation Syndrome || Usher syndrome type I (USH1), the most severe form of this syndrome, is characterized by profound congenital sensorineural deafness, vestibular dysfunction, and retinitis pigmentosa. At least seven USH1 loci, USH1A-G, have been mapped to the chromosome regions 14q32, 11q13.5, 11p15, 10q21-q22, 21q21, 10q21-q22, and 17q24-25, respectively. Mutations in five genes, including MYO7A, USH1C, CDH23, PCDH15 and SANS, have been shown to be the cause of Usher syndrome type 1B, type 1C, type 1D, type 1F and type 1G, respectively. In the present study, we carried out a systematic mutation screening of these genes in USH1 patients from USA and from UK. We identified a total of 27 different mutations; of these, 19 are novel, including nine missense, two nonsense, four deletions, one insertion and three splicing defects. Approximatelly 35-39% of the observed mutations involved the USH1B and USH1D genes, followed by 11% for USH1F and 7% for USH1C in non-Acadian alleles and 7% for USH1G. Two of the 12 MYO7A mutations, R666X and IVS40-1G > T accounted for 38% of the mutations at that locus. A 193delC mutation accounted for 26% of CDH23 (USH1D) mutations, confirming its high frequency. The most common PCDH15 (USH1F) mutation in this study, 5601-5603delAAC, accounts for 33% of mutant alleles. Interestingly, a novel SANS mutation, W38X, was observed only in the USA cohort. The present study suggests that mutations in MYO7A and CDH23 are the two major components of causes for USH1, while PCDH15, USH1C, and SANS are less frequent causes.",1
"The identification of two mis-sense mutations at the PAH gene locus in a Turkish patient with phenylketonuria. || Alleles Base Sequence Chromosome Mapping DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Glutamates Glutamic Acid Glycine Homozygote Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Nucleic Acid Hybridization Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Turkey || DNA sequence analysis of the 13 exons and intron/exon boundaries of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene has detected two base transitions, resulting in mis-sense mutations, in the genomic DNA of a Turkish patient (E1) with phenylketonuria (PKU). The Leu48----Ser amino acid substitution was associated with the mutant haplotype 3 allele and the Glu221----Gly amino acid substitution with the mutant haplotype 4 allele of this family. Allele-specific oligonucleotide (ASO) dot-blot analysis subsequently detected the Leu48----Ser mutation in the haplotype 4 PKU alleles of nine (18.8%) of the 48 unrelated Caucasian PKU families investigated. This mutation results in mild PKU in the homozygous state. The Glu221----Gly mutation has only been detected within patient E1 and his father.",3 1
"Prevalence of asymptomatic vertebral fractures in late-onset Pompe disease. || Adolescent Adult Aged Bone Density Comorbidity Cross-Sectional Studies Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Middle Aged Osteoporosis Prevalence Radiography Spinal Fractures Young Adult || Bone fragility and low bone mass have been reported in small case series of patients with Pompe disease with severely reduced muscle strength or immobilization. Our objective was to determine the prevalence of morphometric vertebral fractures and to evaluate bone mass in adults with late-onset Pompe disease. We conducted a multicenter cross-sectional observational study from August 2012 to December 2013. All subjects were outpatients referred to University Referral Centers. PATIENTS included 22 late-onset Pompe disease patients with progressive proximal myopathy and minimal respiratory involvement without other diseases affecting bone mass. The prevalence of morphometric vertebral fractures was systematically assessed by semiquantitative analysis of lateral spine x-rays (T4-L5). A high prevalence of morphometric vertebral fractures was found. At least 1 vertebral fracture was present in 17 of 22 patients (77%). All vertebral fractures were asymptomatic. Bone mineral density was normal in 36.5% of the patients, whereas 36.5% were osteopenic and 27% were osteoporotic in at least 1 site. Fracture prevalence was independent of muscular and respiratory functional parameters and of genotype. Our data show for the first time that asymptomatic and atraumatic vertebral fractures occur frequently in late-onset Pompe disease patients without a significant impairment of bone mass. Screening for asymptomatic vertebral fractures should be routinely performed in Pompe disease irrespective of the disease severity. Fracture risk should be confirmed in longitudinal studies.",1
"Molecular basis for nonphenylketonuria hyperphenylalaninemia. || Base Sequence Exons Female Haplotypes Humans Infant, Newborn Male Metabolism, Inborn Errors Molecular Sequence Data Oligonucleotide Probes Pedigree Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Tyrosine || Nonphenylketonuria hyperphenylalaninemia (non-PKU HPA) is defined as phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency with blood phenylalanine levels below 600 mumol/liter (i.e., within the therapeutic range) on a normal dietary intake. Haplotype analysis at the PAH locus was performed in 17 Danish families with non-PKU HPA, revealing compound heterozygosity in all individuals. By allele-specific oligonucleotide (ASO) probing for common PKU mutations we found 12 of 17 non-PKU HPA children with a PKU allele on one chromosome. To identify molecular lesions in the second allele, individual exons were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and screened for mutations by single-strand conformation polymorphism. Two new missense mutations were identified. Three children had inherited a G-to-A transition at codon 415 in exon 12 of the PAH gene, resulting in the substitution of asparagine for aspartate, whereas one child possessed an A-to-G transition at codon 306 in exon 9, causing the replacement of an isoleucine by a valine in the enzyme. It is further demonstrated that the identified mutations have less impact on the heterozygote's ability to hydroxylate phenylalanine to tyrosine compared to the parents carrying a PKU mutation. The combined effect on PAH activity explains the non-PKU HPA phenotype of the child. The present observations that PKU mutations in combination with other mutations result in the non-PKU HPA phenotype and that particular mutation-restriction fragment length polymorphism haplotype combinations are associated with this phenotype offer the possibility of distinguishing PKU patients from non-PKU individuals by means of molecular analysis of the hyperphenylalaninemic neonate and, consequently, of determining whether a newborn child requires dietary treatment.",3 1
"Seven cases of Pompe disease from Greece. ||  || We present seven cases of Pompe disease (McKusick 232300; glycogen storage disease type II; acid maltase deficiency) from Greece. The onset of symptoms varied from early childhood to late adulthood, and the patients had quite variable duration of disease. All but one of them had muscle weakness and all had mildly to highly elevated serum creatine kinase. The diagnosis in all cases was confirmed by the finding of acid alpha-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.3/20) deficiency in cultured skin fibroblasts. Thirteen mutant alleles were identified and nine different pathogenic mutations were encountered. Four were new: c.2071_2072insAGCCG leads to frameshift and total loss of function; c.1856G > A (p.Ser619Asn) leads to 90-95% loss of function; and the splice-site mutations c.1552-3C > G and c.2331+4A > G reduce the number of correct splicing events by more than 90%. The splice-site mutation c.-32-13T > G (IVS1-13T > G) was encountered four times and seems equally common among Greek and other caucasians. The other mutations: c.925G > A (p.Gly309Arg), c.[307T > G; 271G > A] (p.Cys103Gly; Asp91Asn), c.271del and c.1655T > C (p.Leu552Pro) have been reported earlier. Our study highlights the heterogeneity of Pompe disease in Greece and provides tools for diagnosis and carrier detection.",3 1 0
"Maternal phenylketonuria in two Sicilian families identified by maternal blood phenylalanine level screening and identification of a new phenylalanine hydroxylase gene mutation (P407L) || Female Genetic Testing Humans Infant, Newborn Italy Mutation Neonatal Screening Pedigree Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonuria, Maternal Phenylketonurias Pregnancy || ",3 1
"Development of a clinical assay for detection of GAA mutations and characterization of the GAA mutation spectrum in a Canadian cohort of individuals with glycogen storage disease, type II. || Alleles DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Predisposition to Disease Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease, type II (GSDII; Pompe disease; acid maltase deficiency) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations of the GAA gene that lead to deficient acid alpha-glucosidase enzyme activity and accumulation of lysosomal glycogen. Although measurement of acid alpha-glucosidase enzyme activity in fibroblasts remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of GSDII, analysis of the GAA gene allows confirmation of clinical or biochemical diagnoses and permits predictive and prenatal testing of individuals at risk of developing GSDII. We have developed a clinical molecular test for the detection of GAA mutations based on cycle sequencing of the complete coding region. GAA exons 2-20 are amplified in six independent PCR using intronic primers. The resulting products were purified and sequenced. Preliminary studies using this protocol were conducted with DNA from 21 GSDII-affected individuals from five centers across Canada. In total, 41 of 42 mutations were detected (96.7% detection rate). Mutations spanned intron 1 through exon 19 and included nine novel mutations. Haplotype analysis of recurrent mutations further suggested that three of these mutations are likely to have occurred independently at least twice. Additionally, we report the identification of the c.-32-13T>G GAA mutation in an individual with infantile variant GSDII, despite reports of this mutation being associated almost exclusively with late-onset forms of the disease. The development of a clinical molecular test provides an important tool for the management and counseling of families and individuals with GSDII, and has provided useful information about the GAA mutation spectrum in Canada.",3 1 4
"B-Cell depletion and immunomodulation before initiation of enzyme replacement therapy blocks the immune response to acid alpha-glucosidase in infantile-onset Pompe disease. || Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived Antigens, CD Autoantibodies B-Lymphocytes Biomarkers Drug Administration Schedule Drug Therapy, Combination Enzyme Replacement Therapy Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay Female Flow Cytometry Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunoglobulin G Immunoglobulins, Intravenous Immunosuppressive Agents Infant Male Mycophenolic Acid Rituximab Sirolimus Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || To evaluate whether B-cell depletion before enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) initiation can block acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) antibody responses and improve clinical outcomes. Six subjects with Pompe disease (including 4 cross-reacting immunologic material-negative infants) aged 2-8 months received rituximab and sirolimus or mycophenolate before ERT. Four subjects continued to receive sirolimus, rituximab every 12 weeks, and intravenous immunoglobulin monthly for the duration of ERT. Sirolimus trough levels, IgG, CD3, CD4, CD8, CD19, CD20, N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide, creatine kinase, creatine kinase-MB, C-reactive protein, platelets, alkaline phosphatase, gamma-glutamyl transferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and alanine aminotransferase were measured regularly. Immunomodulation achieved B-cell depletion without adverse effects. After 17-36 months of rituximab, sirolimus and ERT, all subjects lacked antibodies against GAA, 4 continued to gain motor milestones, yet 2 progressed to require invasive ventilation. The absence of infusion-associated reactions allowed the use of accelerated infusion rates. B-cell depletion and T-cell immunomodulation in infants naïve to ERT was accomplished safely and eliminated immune responses against GAA, thereby optimizing clinical outcome; however, this approach did not necessarily influence sustained independent ventilation. Importantly, study outcomes support the initiation of immunomodulation before starting ERT, because the study regimen allowed for prompt initiation of treatment.",3 1 0
"Identification and characterization of aberrant GAA pre-mRNA splicing in pompe disease using a generic approach. || Adolescent Adult Child Exons Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Introns Middle Aged Mutation RNA Splicing RNA, Messenger Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction alpha-Glucosidases || Identification of pathogenic variants in monogenic diseases is an important aspect of diagnosis, genetic counseling, and prediction of disease severity. Pathogenic mechanisms involved include changes in gene expression, RNA processing, and protein translation. Variants affecting pre-mRNA splicing are difficult to predict due to the complex mechanism of splicing regulation. A generic approach to systematically detect and characterize effects of sequence variants on splicing would improve current diagnostic practice. Here, it is shown that such approach is feasible by combining flanking exon RT-PCR, sequence analysis of PCR products, and exon-internal quantitative RT-PCR for all coding exons. Application of this approach to one novel and six previously published variants in the acid-alpha glucosidase (GAA) gene causing Pompe disease enabled detection of a total of 11 novel splicing events. Aberrant splicing included cryptic splice-site usage, intron retention, and exon skipping. Importantly, the extent of leaky wild-type splicing correlated with disease onset and severity. These results indicate that this approach enables sensitive detection and in-depth characterization of variants affecting splicing, many of which are still unrecognized or poorly understood. The approach is generic and should be adaptable for application to other monogenic diseases to aid in improved diagnostics.",3 1 4 0
"Prevalence of tetrahydrobiopterine (BH4)-responsive alleles among Austrian patients with PAH deficiency: comprehensive results from molecular analysis in 147 patients. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU, MIM 261600) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH, GenBank U49897.1, RefSeq NM_000277). To date more than 560 variants of the PAH gene have been identified. In Europe there is regional distribution of specific mutations. Due to recent progress in chaperone therapy, the prevalence of BH4-responsive alleles gained therapeutic importance. Here we report the mutational spectrum of PAH deficiency in 147 unrelated Austrian families. Overall mutation detection rate was 98.6 %. There was a total of 62 disease-causing mutations, including five novel mutations IVS4 + 6T>A, p.H290Y, IVS8-2A>G, p.A322V and p.I421S. The five most prevalent mutations found in patients were p.R408W, IVS12 + 1G>A, p.R261Q, p.R158Q and IVS2 + 5G>C. Neonatal phenylalanine levels before treatment were available in 114/147 patients. Prediction of BH4-responsiveness in patients with full genotypes was exclusively made according to published data. Among the 133 patients needing dietary treatment, 28.4 % are expected to be BH4 ""non-responsive"", 4.5 % are highly likely BH4-responsive, 35.8 % are probably BH4-responsive while no interpretation was possible for 31.3 %. The mutation data reflect the population history of Austria and provide information on the likely proportion of Austrian PKU patients that may benefit from BH4-therapy.",3 1
"Correction of kinetic and stability defects by tetrahydrobiopterin in phenylketonuria patients with certain phenylalanine hydroxylase mutations. || Biopterin Enzyme Stability Humans Kinetics Models, Molecular Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Oxidation-Reduction Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Tyrosine || Phenylketonuria patients harboring a subset of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) mutations have recently shown normalization of blood phenylalanine levels upon oral administration of the PAH cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin [(6R)-L-erythro-5,6,7,8-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)]. Several hypotheses have been put forward to explain BH4 responsiveness, but the molecular basis for the corrective effect(s) of BH4 has not been understood. We have investigated the biochemical, kinetic, and structural changes associated with BH4-responsive mutations (F39L, I65T, R68S, H170D, E178G, V190A, R261Q, A300S, L308F, A313T, A373T, V388M, E390G, P407S, and Y414C). The biochemical and kinetic characterization of the 15 mutants studied points toward a multifactorial basis for the BH4 responsiveness; the mutants show residual activity (>30% of WT) and display various kinetic defects, including increased Km (BH4) and reduced cooperativity of substrate binding, but no decoupling of cofactor (BH4) oxidation. For some, BH4 seems to function through stabilization and protection of the enzyme from inactivation and proteolytic degradation. In the crystal structures of a phenylketonuria mutant, A313T, minor changes were seen when compared with the WT PAH structures, consistent with the mild effects the mutant has upon activity of the enzyme both in vitro and in vivo. Truncations made in the A313T mutant PAH form revealed that the N and C termini of the enzyme influence active site binding. Of fundamental importance is the observation that BH4 appears to increase Phe catabolism if at least one of the two heterozygous mutations has any residual activity remaining.",1
"Accurate molecular diagnosis of phenylketonuria and tetrahydrobiopterin-deficient hyperphenylalaninemias using high-throughput targeted sequencing. || Biopterin Cohort Studies Computational Biology Exons Gene Library Gene Rearrangement Genome, Human Genomics Genotype High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Phenylketonurias Reproducibility of Results Sensitivity and Specificity Sequence Analysis, DNA Sequence Deletion || Genetic diagnostics of phenylketonuria (PKU) and tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) deficient hyperphenylalaninemia (BH4DH) rely on methods that scan for known mutations or on laborious molecular tools that use Sanger sequencing. We have implemented a novel and much more efficient strategy based on high-throughput multiplex-targeted resequencing of four genes (PAH, GCH1, PTS, and QDPR) that, when affected by loss-of-function mutations, cause PKU and BH4DH. We have validated this approach in a cohort of 95 samples with the previously known PAH, GCH1, PTS, and QDPR mutations and one control sample. Pooled barcoded DNA libraries were enriched using a custom NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Choice array and sequenced using a HiSeq2000 sequencer. The combination of several robust bioinformatics tools allowed us to detect all known pathogenic mutations (point mutations, short insertions/deletions, and large genomic rearrangements) in the 95 samples, without detecting spurious calls in these genes in the control sample. We then used the same capture assay in a discovery cohort of 11 uncharacterized HPA patients using a MiSeq sequencer. In addition, we report the precise characterization of the breakpoints of four genomic rearrangements in PAH, including a novel deletion of 899 bp in intron 3. Our study is a proof-of-principle that high-throughput-targeted resequencing is ready to substitute classical molecular methods to perform differential genetic diagnosis of hyperphenylalaninemias, allowing the establishment of specifically tailored treatments a few days after birth.",3 1
"Ethylmalonic encephalopathy: application of improved biochemical and molecular diagnostic approaches. || Brain Diseases, Metabolic, Inborn Cyprus Female Haplotypes Humans Infant Male Mitochondrial Proteins Mutation, Missense Nucleocytoplasmic Transport Proteins Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Purpura Thiosulfates || Ethylmalonic encephalopathy (EE, OMIM # 602473) is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder of infancy affecting the brain, the gastrointestinal tract and peripheral vessels. It is caused by a defect in the ETHE1 gene product, which was recently shown to be part of a metabolic pathway devoted to sulphide detoxification. We report the application of improved biochemical and molecular approaches to the diagnosis of three cases of EE from two unrelated Cypriot families. The children presented all the typical biochemical hallmarks of the disease including elevated lactate and butyrylcarnitine in blood and elevated urinary excretion of ethylmalonic acid, 2-methylsuccinate, isobutyrylglycine and isovalerylglycine. We also detected an elevated level of thiosulphate in urine, which we propose as an additional biochemical marker of the disease. The proband of the first family was shown to be a compound heterozygote for a missense mutation in exon 5, L185R, and a deletion of exon 4. The deletion was identified using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Using the same technique, the proband of the second family was found to be homozygous for the exon 4 deletion. A prenatal diagnosis was performed for the second family using qRT-PCR, thus establishing the usefulness of RT-PCR in prenatal diagnosis.",1
"CRIM-negative infantile Pompe disease: characterization of immune responses in patients treated with ERT monotherapy. || Cross Reactions Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunoglobulin G Infant Infant, Newborn Isoantibodies Kaplan-Meier Estimate Male Mutation Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with recombinant human acid α-glucosidase (rhGAA) prolongs survival in infantile Pompe disease (IPD). However, the majority of cross-reactive immunologic material (CRIM)-negative (CN) patients have immune responses with significant clinical decline despite continued ERT. We aimed to characterize immune responses in CN patients with IPD receiving ERT monotherapy. A chart review identified 20 CN patients with IPD treated with ERT monotherapy for ≥6 months. Patients were stratified by anti-rhGAA antibody titers: high sustained antibody titers (HSAT; ≥51,200) at least twice; low titers (LT; <6,400) throughout treatment; or sustained intermediate titers (SIT; 6,400-25,600). Despite early initiation of treatment, the majority (85%) of CN patients developed significant antibody titers, most with HSAT associated with invasive ventilation and death. Nearly all patients with HSAT had at least one nonsense GAA mutation, whereas the LT group exclusively carried splice-site or frameshift mutations. Only one patient in the HSAT group is currently alive after successful immune modulation in the entrenched setting. Immunological responses are a significant risk in CN IPD; thus induction of immune tolerance in the naive setting should strongly be considered. Further exploration of factors influencing immune responses is required, particularly with the advent of newborn screening for Pompe disease.",3 1
"Identification of a point mutation in the human lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene causing infantile glycogenosis type II. || Alleles Animals Base Sequence Cell Line DNA Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel Exons Gene Expression Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Lysosomes Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Transfection alpha-Glucosidases || Two patients in a consanguineous Indian family with infantile glycogenosis type II were found to have a G to A transition in exon 11 of the human lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene. Both patients were homozygous and both parents were heterozygous for the mutant allele. The mutation causes a Glu to Lys substitution at amino acid position 521, just three amino acids downstream from the catalytic site at Asp-518. The mutation was introduced in wild type lysosomal alpha-glucosidase cDNA and the mutant construct was expressed in vitro and in vivo. The Glu to Lys substitution is proven to account for the abnormal physical properties of the patients lysosomal alpha-glucosidase precursor and to prevent the formation of catalytically active enzyme. In homozygous form it leads to the severe infantile phenotype of glycogenosis type II.",3 1 0
"A European multicenter study of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency: classification of 105 mutations and a general system for genotype-based prediction of metabolic phenotype. || Alleles Europe Genotype Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Phenylketonuria (PKU) and mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP) are allelic disorders caused by mutations in the gene encoding phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). Previous studies have suggested that the highly variable metabolic phenotypes of PAH deficiency correlate with PAH genotypes. We identified both causative mutations in 686 patients from seven European centers. On the basis of the phenotypic characteristics of 297 functionally hemizygous patients, 105 of the mutations were assigned to one of four arbitrary phenotype categories. We proposed and tested a simple model for correlation between genotype and phenotypic outcome. The observed phenotype matched the predicted phenotype in 79% of the cases, and in only 5 of 184 patients was the observed phenotype more than one category away from that expected. Among the seven contributing centers, the proportion of patients for whom the observed phenotype did not match the predicted phenotype was 4%-23% (P<.0001), suggesting that differences in methods used for mutation detection or phenotype classification may account for a considerable proportion of genotype-phenotype inconsistencies. Our data indicate that the PAH-mutation genotype is the main determinant of metabolic phenotype in most patients with PAH deficiency. In the present study, the classification of 105 PAH mutations may allow the prediction of the biochemical phenotype in >10,000 genotypes, which may be useful for the management of hyperphenylalaninemia in newborns.",3 1
"Quality of diagnostic mutation analyses for phenylketonuria. ||  || DNA sequence analyses have become a major component in the diagnostic work-up of patients; however, limited consideration appears to be given to the possibility that reported results may in fact be wrong. Over the last four years we have carried out an External Quality Assessment scheme for mutation analysis in phenylketonuria. Each year, three DNA samples with previously characterized genotypes were mailed to participating laboratories. Indications for testing were either confirmation of diagnosis and prediction of disease severity, or carrier analysis. Each year there were several laboratories that failed to identify mutations because of methodological limitations. Of the participating laboratories that used comprehensive mutation detection methods, each year there was at least one that missed at least one mutation. Indeed, in the 2007 scheme almost 8% of reports from laboratories that used comprehensive mutation detection methods such as sequencing of all exons of the PAH gene contained incorrect genotypes. There were also serious deficiencies in the interpretation of genotype data: in the 2007 scheme, 6 out of 10 laboratories that obtained full genotyping marks for interpretation incurred a reduction of marks because information on the expected phenotype was missing or wrong. Several laboratories failed to appreciate the clinical relevance of a mutation associated with mild hyperphenylalaninaemia, which does not require treatment, and some discussed the option of prenatal diagnosis in the respective case. In conclusion, mutation analyses may be prone to errors and this demands careful interpretation of results in relation to clinical and biochemical findings.",1
"Development of a feasible assay for the detection of GAA mutations in patients with Pompe disease. || Base Sequence Child Child, Preschool Conserved Sequence DNA Mutational Analysis Feasibility Studies Female Gene Frequency Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Nucleic Acid Denaturation Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction Transition Temperature alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an inherited autosomal recessive deficiency of acid α-glucosidase (GAA) and is due to pathogenic sequence variants in the corresponding GAA gene. While the analysis of enzyme activity remains the diagnostic test of choice for individuals with Pompe disease, mutation analysis remains for establishing a definitive diagnosis. High resolution melting (HRM) analysis was performed to screen GAA mutations. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples of the two patients with Pompe disease and 250 normal controls. Exons 2 through 20 of the GAA gene were screened by the HRM analysis. The results were subsequently confirmed by direct sequencing. This assay proved to be feasible in detecting seven known (c.2T>C, c.1726G>A, c.1845G>A, c.1935C>A, c.1958C>A, c.2238G>C, and c.2815_2816del) GAA mutations. Each mutation could be readily and accurately identified in the difference plot curves. We estimated the carrier frequency of the most common mutation, c.1935G>A (p.D645E), in the Taiwanese population to be 0.2%. In clinical practice, we suggest that HRM analysis is assumed as a fast and reliable method for screening GAA gene mutations especially the most common mutations which are responsible for Pompe disease among the Taiwanese populations.",1
"Outcome of patients with classical infantile pompe disease receiving enzyme replacement therapy in Germany. ||  || Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has been shown to improve outcome in classical infantile Pompe disease. The purpose of this study was to assess mortality, morbidity, and shortcomings of ERT in a larger cohort of patients treated outside clinical trials. To accomplish this, we retrospectively analyzed the data of all 23 subjects with classical infantile Pompe disease having started ERT in Germany between January 2003 and December 2010. Ten patients (43%) deceased and four others (17%) became ventilator dependent. Seven infants (30.5%) made no motor progress at all, while seven (30.5%) achieved free sitting, and nine (39%) gained free walking. Besides all the seven patients (100%) attaining no improvement of motor functions, four out of the seven (57%) achieving to sit without support, and three out of the nine (33%) being able to walk independently, secondarily deteriorated, and died or became ventilator dependent. Sustained reduction of systolic function despite reversal of cardiac hypertrophy (n = 3), gastroesophageal reflux (n = 5), swallowing difficulties or failure to thrive (n = 11), recurrent pneumonias (n = 14), port system complications (n = 4), anesthesia-related incidents (n = 2), severe allergic reactions (n = 6), hearing loss (n = 3), and orthopedic deformities (n = 4) were problems frequently encountered. Although this study has important shortcomings due to its retrospective nature and because important variables potentially influencing outcome were not available for a substantial amount of patients, these data suggest that classical infantile Pompe disease still remains a life-threatening condition associated with high morbidity and often dismal prognosis. Currently, a relevant number of patients do not benefit definitely from ERT.",1
"[The mutant spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in Northern Chinese]. ||  || To understand the mutant spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene in Northern Chinese. All the exons and flaking introns of PAH gene were detected by PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR/SSCP) and sequencing in 230 patients with phenylketonuria (PKU). (1) A total of 75 different mutations were detected in 435 out of 460 mutant alleles (94.6%). Among them 3 mutations (S251-R252>SfsX89, Y387D and A389G) have not been reported previously. The mutations, R243Q, EX6-96A>G, R111X, R413P and Y356X, were the prevalent mutations with relative frequencies of 21.7%, 10.2%, 8.3%, 6.5%, and 6.1% respectively, followed by V399V(4.1%), IVS4-1G>A (3.5%), IVS7+2T>A (2.2%) and R241C(2.2%). Most mutations were detected in exons 3, 5, 6, 7, 11 and 12 and flaking introns of PAH gene. (2) Ten polymorphism sites were detected in the study. Four sites, IVS3-22C>T, IVS10+97G>A, Q232Q and V245V, had high relative frequencies of 56.7%, 75.9%, 89.0% and 81.9% respectively. It would suggest that the race diversity exists in PAH cDNA sequence. The mutation spectrum of PAH gene in Northern Chinese is similar to other Asian populations but significantly different from European populations.",3 1
"SLC26A4 p.Thr410Met homozygous mutation in a patient with a cystic cochlea and an enlarged vestibular aqueduct showing characteristic features of incomplete partition type I and II. || Child Cochlea Cochlear Implantation Deafness Homozygote Humans Male Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Sulfate Transporters Vestibular Aqueduct || Mutations of SLC26A4 are associated with incomplete partition type II (IP-II) and isolated enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct (EVA). We experienced a congenitally deaf 6-year-old boy with a rare p.Thr410Met homozygous mutation in SLC26A4 who underwent bilateral cochlear implantation. He had bilateral inner ear malformation, in which the dilated vestibule and EVA were identical to those in IP-II, but the cochlea lacking a bony modiolus resembled that in incomplete partition type I. These results suggest that homozygous mutations in SLC26A4 are always associated with EVA, while the severity of cochlear malformation may vary depending on the type of SLC26A4 mutation.",1
"Acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency (glycogenosis type II, Pompe disease). ||  || Glycogenosis type II (GSDII, Pompe disease) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease caused by a deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (acid maltase, GAA). The enzyme degrades alpha -1,4 and alpha -1,6 linkages in glycogen, maltose, and isomaltose. Deficiency of the enzyme results in accumulation of glycogen within lysosomes and in cytoplasm eventually leading to tissue destruction. The discovery of the acid a-glucosidase gene has led to rapid progress in understanding the molecular basis of glycogenosis type II and the biological properties of the GAA protein. The last decade has seen several developments: 1) extensive mutational analysis in patients with different forms of the disease, 2) characterization of the enzyme biosynthesis, processing, and lysosomal targeting, 3) generation of knockout mouse models, 4) development of viral vectors for gene replacement therapy, 5) the production of recombinant human enzyme, and 6) a shift in the enzyme replacement therapy approach from theory to practice. It is anticipated that the enzyme replacement therapy will be widely available for human use in the near future. Several recent reviews (including the most comprehensive one by R. Hirschhorn and A. Reuser [1]), address clinical, biochemical and genetic aspects of the disease, as well as development of new therapies for GSDII [2, 3, 4]. In this article we will review recent findings in the area including rapidly accumulating molecular genetic data (more than 20 mutations need to be added to the list), transcriptional control of gene expression, studies in mouse models, and new approaches to gene therapy. We will also highlight some emerging questions following the introduction of enzyme replacement therapy.",1
"Effects of immune modulation therapy in the first Croatian infant diagnosed with Pompe disease: a 3-year follow-up study. || Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived Croatia Drug Therapy, Combination Female Follow-Up Studies Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunologic Factors Immunosuppressive Agents Infant Injections, Intravenous Methotrexate Rituximab Treatment Outcome gamma-Globulins || Pompe disease is a storage disorder characterized by deficient or absent activity of the enzyme acid alpha-glucosidase. As a result of ineffective metabolism, glycogen accumulates in muscle tissues. Patients with a classic infantile-onset form present by the first few months of life with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and muscle weakness. If left untreated, these patients rapidly die of cardiorespiratory failure. A cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM)-negative status is predictive of high anti-alglucosidase alpha antibody titers. However, CRIM-positive patients also sometimes develop robust antibody titers. High antibody titers complicate therapeutic management, and those patients have a worse clinical outcome of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT).Four years ago, we successfully used an immune modulation therapy (IMT) protocol in a CRIM-positive infantile-onset patient with Pompe disease in whom ERT had to be discontinued because of severe infusion-associated reactions. She was found to be positive for anti-alglucosidase alpha antibodies. IMT (rituximab, methotrexate, and intravenous gammaglobulin) was started, and ERT was safely reintroduced during the IMT induction phase without any complications. Antibodies disappeared; IMT was tapered and discontinued; and cardiomyopathy steadily improved. During more than 3 years of follow-up, she remained ventilator dependent, and no gains in motor skills were noticed. The antibodies are still undetectable, and no adverse reactions associated with IMT had occurred. The cardiomyopathy is gradually increasing, but there is still ~ 50 % reduction as compared with the highest value measured. Although the reversal of clinical decline in our CRIM-positive and antibody-positive infant cannot be solely attributed to IMT, this protocol proved itself efficient and safe.",3 1
"[Juvenile Pompe disease: retrospective clinical study]. ||  || Pompe disease or glycogen storage disease type II is an autosomal recessive disorder due to acid maltase deficiency. It is a rare disease with a prevalence of 1/40.000 in the dutch and african-american populations and 1/46000 in the australian population. There are three forms of clinical presentation (infantile-onset, childhood-onset and adult-onset), although the disease presents as a continuum of clinical phenotypes. Enzyme replacement therapy is available in Portugal since 2006. The clinical files of four patients (two sisters) were analyzed retrospectively. In all, disease presented in the second year of life and the time to diagnosis ranged from two to eleven years. At diagnosis, all presented myopathic features with a delay in motor skills achievement and two had myocardium hypertrophy. Clinical suspicion arose as the result of respiratory failure during infection in two patients. Plasma creatine kinase and aminotransferases levels were increased in all. All patients progressed to pulmonary restrictive syndrome with chronic respiratory failure. The diagnosis was based on reduced activity of acid maltase in fibroblasts: 0 to 1.5% of the lower normal value. Muscle biopsy, performed in three patients, showed lysosomal glycogen accumulation. A c.1064T > C mutation in exon 6 of GAA (glucosidase-alpha-acid) gene was found in all patients, in homozygosity in one. In the sisters, it was associated to c.1666A > G and c.2065G > A mutations in exons 12 and 15, respectively and in the youngest patient, to c.380G > T mutation in exon 2. All patients started enzyme replacement therapy as soon as it became available, with good tolerance. The youngest patient died. The surviving patients maintain ventilatory support measures and physiotherapy. The oldest patient is wheelchair ridden and her sister keeps independent walking. The youngest uses a walking aid. Our cases are clinically included in the juvenile form of Pompe Disease. Pompe disease should be suspected in progressive myopathies at any age, especially those involving limb-girdle and respiratory muscles and in small infants with cardiomyopathy. High creatine kinase is a sensitive, although nonspecific, marker. Given the great variability of the genetic findings, demonstration of reduced activity of acid maltase (in leukocytes or other tissues) remains the diagnosis cornerstone of this rare disorder.",1
"[Analysis of clinical features of 6 patients with infantile type glycogen storage disease type II]. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Macroglossia Male Muscle Weakness Mutation Mutation, Missense Polymerase Chain Reaction alpha-Glucosidases || To summarize clinical features and diagnosis of Chinese infantile patients with glycogen storage disease type II (GSD II). Six infant patients with GSD II diagnosed from January 2012 to June 2014 in the Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital were enrolled into this study. Clinical information of the 6 patients, including clinical manifestation, blood biochemistry, chest X-ray, echocardiogram, electrocardiogram, acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) activity and GAA gene mutation analysis by direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) product were reviewed. Of the 6 patients, five were female and one was male, five of whom were classic infantile type while the other one was atypical. The age of onset ranged from birth to 3-month-old. All patients had varying degrees of generalized muscle weakness, hypotonia and development retardation or retrogression. Other common findings were feeding difficulties in two patients, tongue weakness in two patients, respiratory distress in four patients, macroglossia in one patient, and hepatomegaly in two patients. Left ventricular hypertrophy and cardiomegaly were obvious in all the six patients. All six patients were found to have a enlarged heart in physical examination, and three patients who underwent a chest X-ray examination had an enlarged heart shadow. Four patients who had an echocardiography were found to have myocardial hypertrophy. The electrocardiogram in three patients showed short PR intervals and high voltage. The creatine kinase (CK) levels were three to seven times elevated. The mildest elevated CK was 441 IU/L, and the highest CK level was 1 238 U/L. Assay of GAA enzyme activity in whole blood showed significantly reduced activity (1.3 nmol/ (spot·d) to 2 nmol/(spot·d)) in the patients tested. Gene sequencing in 4 patients showed 8 pathogenic mutations, including 6 missense mutations, one nonsense mutation and one frameshift mutation. The missense mutations were c.998C > A (p.Thr333Lys), c.1280T > C (p.Met427Thr), c.1760T > C (p.Leu587Pro), c.1924G > T (p.Val642Phe), c.2012T > A (p.Met671Lys) and c.2105G > A (p.Arg702His). The nonsense mutation was c2662G > T (p.Glu888X), and the frameshift mutation was c2812_2813delTG (p.Cys938fs). The 5 classic infantile patients died at the age of 7 to 22 months. The atypical infantile patient was 2 years and five months old according to our latest follow up. Infantile GSD II had similar motor manifestations and cardiac involvements, blood biochemical test, imaging findings, enzyme assays, though there were slight differences. The probability of GSD II should be taken into consideration if an infant has both muscular disease and cardiac involvement.",1
"Rapid progressive course of later-onset Pompe disease in Chinese patients. || Adolescent Adult Asian Continental Ancestry Group Enzyme Replacement Therapy Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Point Mutation Respiration, Artificial Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Taiwan Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease presents with a wide variety of phenotypes ranging from a fatal disease in infancy (the infantile-onset form) to other milder later-onset forms. Currently, the clinical manifestations in Chinese patients with later-onset Pompe disease are still not well understood. Fifteen Chinese patients who were clinically diagnosed with Pompe disease at later than one year of age at the National Taiwan University Hospital from 1993 to 2009 were included in this study. Confirmatory diagnosis included both biochemical and molecular tests. Patient outcomes after recombinant human acid α-glucosidase (GAA) therapy were also evaluated by assessing the percentage of predicted forced vital capacity in the upright position, hours of daily ventilator use, and the functional status change using Walton Gardner Medwin Scale. The median age at symptom onset was 15 (12-35)years, and the median age at diagnosis was 21 (10-38)years. At the time of diagnosis or shortly after, 8 patients (53%) required mechanical ventilation. A quadriceps muscle biopsy from a 13-year-old boy already showed extensive glycogen storage and muscle fiber destruction. Mutation analysis revealed that the two dual mutations in the GAA gene c.[1935C>A; 1726G>A] (p.[D645E; G576S]) and c.[2238G>C; 1726G>A] (p.[W746C; G576S]) represented 66.5% of the mutated chromosomes. Using mutagenesis, we showed that the p.G576S pseudodeficiency mutation significantly decreased the residual enzyme activity of p.W746C. Most patients responded poorly to recombinant human GAA. Chinese patients with later-onset Pompe disease often showed onset of symptoms in their second decade of life with rapid disease progression, which is probably due to a specific pattern of GAA gene mutation. Therefore, early diagnosis and early treatment would be necessary to improve the prognosis of these patients.",3 1 4 0
"The Identification of Pompe Disease Mutations in Archival Tissues and Development of a Rapid Molecular-based Test. ||  || Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II) is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease that is caused by acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency. Early enzyme replacement therapy can benefit infants with the disease but the diagnosis is complicated by the rarity of the disease and the heterogeneity of the clinical manifestations. In this study, DNA extracted from archival postmortem formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues was used to identify Pompe disease mutations in Oman and develop a rapid molecular-based test. Intronic primers were designed to amplify short fragments (193-454 base pairs [bp]) from coding exons (2-20) and screen for mutations using direct sequencing (DS). Two mutations known to cause severe disease were identified in two samples. One was a coding mutation, c.2560C>T (p.Arg854X), and the second was found at a splice acceptor site, c.1327-2A>G. Polymerase chain reaction- and restriction fragment length polymorphism-based tests were designed for the rapid genotyping of the identified mutations. These tests can facilitate prenatal diagnosis and help in identifying carriers in families with the identified mutations.",1
"Tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness in patients with phenylketonuria. || Adolescent Adult Biopterin Child, Preschool Dose-Response Relationship, Drug Female Humans Infant Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylketonurias Pregnancy || To investigate the BH4 response in a group of patients with phenylketonuria (PKU) in order to offer this alternative treatment to the responsive patients. The 24-h-long Phe/BH4 loading test was performed on 64 PKU patients requiring dietary treatment. All patients with mild-PKU and 75% of patients with moderate-PKU were BH4 responsive, while only 11% of classic-PKU patients showed good/partial response (P < 0.0001). The percentages of Phe decrease after the BH4 loading test were significantly different in the three PKU phenotypes (mild PKU: 67.9 +/- 18.7; moderate PKU: 37.4 +/- 16.8; and classical PKU: 21.9 +/- 13.7; ANOVA with Bonferroni correction: P < 0.0001). We report four mutations (P147S, D222G, P275S, and P362T) not previously associated with BH4 responsiveness, all of them combined with mutations with zero predicted residual activity. Both the percentage of Phe decrease and the Phe value achieved 24 h after BH4 loading are valuable data in predicting a response. We report four mutations not previously associated with BH4 responsiveness.",3 1
"Two extremes of the clinical spectrum of glycogen storage disease type II in one family: a matter of genotype. ||  || Mutation analysis was performed in a nonconsanguineous Dutch caucasian family with a grandfather presenting the first symptoms of glycogen storage disease type II (acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency) in the sixth decade of life and a grandchild with onset of symptoms shortly after birth. The grandfather was identified as compound heterozygote having the IVS1(-13T-->G)/delta T525 combination of mutant acid alpha-glucosidase alleles, the affected third generation offspring as homozygote delta T525/delta T525. The disease phenotypes in this family are in accordance with the genotypes since the IVS1(-13T-->G) mutation reduces acid alpha-glucosidase synthesis by 60 to 80%, whereas the delta T525 mutation completely prohibits the formation of catalytically active enzyme. Four additional families were identified with patients homozygote for delta T525 and five others with an equally deleterious delta T525/delta exon 18 genotype. The nine latter patients had typically the infantile form of glycogen storage disease type II. The genotype-phenotype correlation is irrefutable.",1
"Severe Cardiomyopathy as the Isolated Presenting Feature in an Adult with Late-Onset Pompe Disease: A Case Report. || Acid phosphatase Cardiomyopathy Electron microscopy Hypertrophic Membrane-bound Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II) Vacuolation || Many inborn errors of metabolism can cause cardiomyopathy. Cardiomyopathy associated with glycogen storage includes PRKAG2-associated glycogen storage disease (GSD), Danon disease, infantile-onset Pompe disease (GSD II), GSD III, GSD IV, and phosphofructokinase deficiency (Tarui disease or GSD VII).We present a 35-year-old female who presented with cardiomyopathy after a pregnancy complicated by primary hyperparathyroidism. She had enjoyed excellent health until her first pregnancy at age 33. One week postpartum, she developed dyspnea and an echocardiogram revealed left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 35%. A cardiac MRI was consistent with nonischemic cardiomyopathy with an infiltrative process. Endomyocardial biopsy showed striking sarcoplasmic vacuolization, excess glycogen by PAS staining, and frequent membrane-bound glycogen by electron microscopy, consistent with lysosomal GSD. Acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) activity in skin fibroblasts was in the affected range for Pompe disease. Sequencing of the GAA gene revealed a paternally inherited pathogenic c.525delT (p.Glu176Argfs*45) and a de novo c.309C>G (p.Cys103Trp) with unknown pathogenicity. Testing of the familial mutations in her daughter indicated that the variants in the proband were in trans. 26-gene cardiomyopathy sequencing panel had normal results thereby excluding GSD III, Danon disease, Fabry disease, and PRKAG2-associated cardiomyopathy. Therefore, results strongly suggest a diagnosis of Pompe disease.Pompe disease has a broad disease spectrum, including infantile-onset (IOPD) and late-onset (LOPD) forms. LOPD typically presents with proximal muscle weakness and respiratory insufficiency in childhood or late adulthood. Our case may represent a very unusual presentation of adult LOPD with isolated cardiomyopathy without skeletal muscle involvement or respiratory failure.",1
"Genetic analysis carried out on blood-spots of phenylalanine hydroxylase-deficient newborns detected by northeastern Italian neonatal screening. || Amino Acid Substitution DNA Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Italy Mutation Neonatal Screening Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic || The aim of this work was to perform genetic analysis on 18 different blood-spot samples collected from neonates detected as hyperphenylalaninemic by Northeastern Italian screening program. DNA was extracted from blood-spots. Exons/introns of PAH gene were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and PCR products were purified and sequenced with both forward and reverse primers. The most frequent mutations were IVS12nt1g>a (16.7%) and R408W, P281L and L48S (all together 11.1%). As expected, compound heterozygosity was the usual finding; homozygosity was found only in two patients with R158Q and IVS2nt5g>c mutations. The V230I mutation was reported for the first time in Italy. We found six previously described polymorphisms (V245V, IVS4nt47c>t, IVS2nt19t>c, IVS3nt-22c>t, IVS5nt-54a>g, and E280>Q280). To our knowledge, four genotypes were not previously described: R158Q/V230I present in one patient with classical PKU; and L48S/R408Q, A403V/IVS2nt-13t>g, and G272X/V230I present in patients showing HPA phenotype. Most of the mutations were located in the exons 12 and 7 and in exon/intron 2 (83.3% detection of total mutations in PKU or HPA patients of Northeastern Italy). From a practical viewpoint, the genetic analysis of blood-spots collected on Guthrie cards for neonatal screening for PKU could be a simple method to establish the genotype of neonates. Consequently, the genotype/phenotype correlation could lead to a more accurate diagnosis and prognosis for families.",1
"Biopterin responsive phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. There have been more than 400 mutations identified in the PAH gene leading to variable degrees of deficiency in PAH activity, and consequently a wide spectrum of clinical severity. A pilot study was undertaken to examine the response to 6-R-l-erythro-5,6,7,8-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) in patients with atypical and classical PKU. PAH gene mutation analysis was performed using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and gene sequencing. Patients with classical, atypical, or mild PKU were orally given BH4 10 mg/kg. Blood phenylalanine and tyrosine levels were determined using tandem MS/MS at 0 hours, 4 hours, 8 hours, and 24 hours intervals. Thirty-six patients were given a single oral dose of 10 mg/kg of BH4. Twenty one patients (58.33%) responded with a decrease in blood phenylalanine level. Of the patients that responded, 12 were classical, 7 atypical, and 2 mild. The mean decline in blood phenylalanine at 24 hours was > 30% of baseline. There were 15 patients who did not respond to the BH4 challenge, 14 of those had classical and one had atypical PKU. Mapping the mutations that responded to BH4 on the PAH enzyme showed that mutations were in the catalytic, regulatory, oligomerization, and BH4 binding domains. Five patients responding to BH4 had mutations not previously identified. The data presented suggest higher than anticipated number of PKU mutations respond to BH4, and such mutations are on all the domains of PAH.",3 1
"Urine analysis of glucose tetrasaccharide by HPLC; a useful marker for the investigation of patients with Pompe and other glycogen storage diseases. ||  || A high performance liquid chromatography method, adapted from an established urinary sugars method, has been developed for the analysis of a tetraglucose oligomer (Glc(4)) in urine. Pompe disease results from defects in the activity of lysosomal acid α-glucosidase (GAA) with patients typically excreting increased amounts of Glc(4). Rapid determination of GAA in dried blood spots is now possible. However, enzymatic analysis is unable to discriminate between patients with Pompe disease and those individuals harbouring pseudo deficiency mutations. This method was able to quantify Glc(4) levels in all patients analysed with an established diagnosis of Pompe disease, and all controls analysed had Glc(4) levels below the limit of detection for this method. Importantly the method was able to discriminate between an individual known to harbour a pseudo Pompe mutation and patients with Pompe disease, providing a useful supporting test to enzymatic analysis. Sequential measurement of urinary Glc(4) has been proposed to monitor the effects of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). We observed a clear decrease in Glc(4) levels following commencement of treatment in three patients studied. Additionally, raised levels of Glc(4) were observed in patients with glycogen storage disease (GSD) type Ia and type III suggesting that this method may have applications in other GSDs.",1
"Phenylketonuria in Italy: distinct distribution pattern of three mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by the deficiency of a liver-specific enzyme, phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). The pattern of PAH mutations in Mediterranean populations appears to be different from that observed in northern Europe and Asia. Our aim was to study the molecular basis of PKU in Campania and Calabria, two regions of southern Italy. We studied 99 unrelated alleles, detecting 75.8% of the mutations. Our results show that 57% of all the PKU alleles are caused by three different mutations: IVS10nt-546, R261Q and L48S, which display significant differences in their relative distribution across Italy. A novel mutation, a G-to-T transversion at the codon 257 (G257C), was also identified. This mutation results in a Gly-to-Cys change in the catalytic domain of the protein.",3 1
"Combination of two different homozygote mutations in Pompe disease. || DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Homozygote Humans Infant Mutation Phenotype alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease (OMIM no 232300) is an autosomal recessive inherited metabolic disorder, caused by glycogen accumulation in the lysosome due to deficiency of the lysosomal acid 03B1-glucosidase enzyme. Here we report the case of an 8-month-old girl of consanguineous Turkish parents, who was diagnosed with the infantile form of Pompe disease. Two different uncommon homozygote mutations (c.32-13 T > G homozygote and c.1856G > A homozygote) were detected. The patient had a more progressive clinical course than expected. We emphasize the rare combination of genetic mutations in this Turkish family with Pompe disease.",1
"PAH deficiency in Italy: correlation of genotype with phenotype in the Sicilian population. ||  || The results of the neonatal screening for phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency in Sicily show that its incidence is higher than previously reported for mainland Italians and that non-PKU HPA is in excess of classical and mild PKU. The latter finding suggests that a high number of non-PKU HPA mutations would occur in the Sicilian population compared to populations with an inverted PKU/non-PKU HPA ratio. Previous studies have identified 40 mutations accounting for the majority (98%) of mutant alleles underlying PAH deficiency in Sicily. In order to study the molecular basis of the distribution of PAH deficiency phenotypes in the Sicilian population, we have correlated 31 of those mutations with clinical and metabolic phenotypes in 12 mentally retarded patients, 14 treated patients with classic or mild PKU, and 13 subjects presenting the non-PKU HPA phenotype. The present study proposes a tentative classification for a large number (26) of PAH gene mutations which may represent an additional tool for establishing a differential diagnosis for PAH deficiency in the Sicilian population.",1
"Mutations in the acid alpha-glucosidase gene (M. Pompe) in a patient with an unusual phenotype. || Adult Amino Acid Substitution Calcinosis Carotid Arteries Cerebral Arteries Codon DNA Mutational Analysis Diagnosis, Differential Female Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Headache Humans Intracranial Arteriosclerosis Migraine Disorders Mutation, Missense Paresthesia Phenotype Point Mutation Risk Factors alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogenosis type II (Pompe disease) is a lysosomal storage disease caused by deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (acid maltase). The disease is autosomal recessive inherited and is clinically and genetically heterogenous. The authors describe a 30-year-old woman affected by late-onset Pompe disease with vascular affection resembling atherosclerotic angiopathy of the elderly. Genetic analysis revealed two novel mutations (Ala237Val and Gly293Arg) in the acid alpha-glucosidase gene in this patient.",1
Pompe disease presenting as an isolated generalized dilative arteriopathy with repeated brain and kidney infarcts. || Arteries Brain Infarction Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Kidney Diseases Male Middle Aged Vascular Diseases alpha-Glucosidases || ,3 1 4
"The Genetics of Usher Syndrome in the Israeli and Palestinian Populations. ||  || Usher syndrome (USH) is the most common cause for deaf-blindness. It is genetically and clinically heterogeneous and prevalent in populations with high consanguinity rate. We aim to characterize the set of genes and mutations that cause USH in the Israeli and Palestinian populations. Seventy-four families with USH were recruited (23 with USH type 1 [USH1], 33 with USH2, seven with USH3, four with atypical USH, and seven families with an undetermined USH type). All affected subjects underwent a full ocular evaluation. A comprehensive genetic analysis, including Sanger sequencing for the detection of founder mutations, homozygosity mapping, and whole exome sequencing in large families was performed. In 79% of the families (59 out of 74), an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern could be determined. Mutation detection analysis led to the identification of biallelic causative mutations in 51 (69%) of the families, including 21 families with mutations in USH2A, 17 in MYO7A, and seven in CLRN1. Our analysis revealed 28 mutations, 11 of which are novel (including c.802G>A, c.8558+1G>T, c.10211del, and c.14023A>T in USH2A; c.285+2T>G, c.2187+1G>T, c.3892G>A, c.5069_5070insC, c.5101C>T, and c.6196C>T in MYO7A; and c.15494del in GPR98). We report here novel homozygous mutations in various genes causing USH, extending the spectrum of causative mutations. We also prove combined sequencing techniques as useful tools to identify novel disease-causing mutations. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest report of a genetic analysis of Israeli and Palestinian families (n = 74) with different USH subtypes.",1
"Molecular heterogeneity of nonphenylketonuria hyperphenylalaninemia in 25 Danish patients. || Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Base Sequence Codon DNA Denmark Exons Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Introns Mass Screening Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Point Mutation || ",2 1 3
"Molecular epidemiology and BH4-responsiveness in patients with phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency from Galicia region of Spain. || Adolescent Adult Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Female Gene Frequency Genetic Association Studies Humans Male Molecular Epidemiology Mutation Pedigree Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Spain Young Adult || Knowledge of hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) mutational spectrum in a population allows in many cases an accurate prediction of the phenotype and tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) responsiveness, thus selecting an adequate treatment. In this work, we have performed the molecular characterization of 105 HPA patients from Galicia, in the northwest region of Spain, evaluating their phenotype and BH4 response. The mutational spectrum analysis showed 47 distinct mutations in 89 families, 37 of them (78.7%) corresponding to missense mutations. Six mutations account for 47.2% of all the investigated alleles, each one with a frequency ≥ 5% (IVS10-11G>A, p.R261Q, p.V388M, p.R176L, p.E280K, p.A300S). The most prevalent HPA mutations in Galicia are the common Mediterranean mutation IVS10-11G>A and p.R261Q, with frequencies of 13.8% and 10.5%, respectively. One novel mutation (p.K361Q; c.1081A>C) was also reported. Although a good genotype-phenotype correlation is observed, there is no exact correlation for some genotypes involving mutations p.R261Q, p.I65T or IVS10-11G>A. Forty seven patients were monitored for post-challenge BH4, establishing genotype-based predictions of BH4-responsiveness in all of them. All phenylketonuric patients with 2 nonresponsive mutations were unresponsive to BH4 and patients with mutations previously associated with BH4 responsiveness in the two alleles had a clear positive response to the test, with the exception of 5 patients with mutations p.R261Q, p.I65T and p.R68S. Our study supports a similar degree of heterogeneity of the HPA mutation spectrum in Galicia compared to reported data from Southern Europe. Patients carrying null mutations in both alleles showed the highest degree of concordance with the most severe phenotypes. Genotype is a good predictor of BH4 response.",3 1
"Targeted population screening of late onset Pompe disease in unspecified myopathy patients for Korean population. || Adult Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Muscular Diseases Prospective Studies Republic of Korea alpha-Glucosidases || We performed targeted population screening of late onset Pompe disease (LOPD) in unspecified myopathy patients, because early diagnosis is difficult due to its heterogeneous clinical features. We prospectively enrolled 90 unrelated myopathic patients who had one or more signs out of five LOPD-like clinical findings (proximal weakness, axial weakness, lingual weakness, respiratory difficulty, idiopathic hyperCKemia). Acid alpha glucosidase activity was evaluated with dried blood spot and mixed leukocyte simultaneously. For a final diagnosis of LOPD, 16 patients with decreased enzyme activity were genotyped by GAA molecular analysis. We found two patients with LOPD (2.2%), and the remaining 14 patients had at least one G576S or E689K mutation, known as the pseudodeficiency allele. Acid alpha glucosidase activity of LOPD patients was significantly lower than that of patients with at least one pseudodeficiency allele (p = 0.017). This study is the first LOPD screening study for targeted Korean population, and more generally, an Asian population. Our findings suggest that for diagnosis of LOPD in Asian population, modified cutoff value of acid alpha glucosidase activity with dry blood spot considering that of patients having heterozygote pathogenic variants or pseudodeficiency alleles may reduce time and cost requirements and increase the comfort of patients.",3 1
"Novel GAA sequence variant c.1211 A>G reduces enzyme activity but not protein expression in infantile and adult onset Pompe disease. || Age of Onset Case-Control Studies Female Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II HEK293 Cells Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Mutation Mutation, Missense Pedigree Phenotype Pregnancy Quadriceps Muscle RNA Splicing Reference Values || Pompe disease is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous autosomal recessive disorder caused by lysosomal acid α-glucosidase (GAA) deficiency. We report on two affected members of a non-consanguineous Caucasian family, including a classical infantile-onset patient with severe cardiomyopathy (IO) and his paternal grandmother with the adult-onset (AO) form. Two compound heterozygous sequence variants of the GAA gene were identified in each patient by mutation analyses (IO=c.1211A>G and c.1798C>T; AO=c.1211A>G and c.692+5G>T). For this study, the biochemical phenotype resulting from the missense mutation c.1211A>G in exon 8, which converts a highly conserved aspartate to glycine (p.Asp404Gly), was of specific interest because it had not been reported previously. Western blotting revealed a robust expression of all GAA isoforms in quadriceps muscle of both patients (fully CRIM positive), while enzymatic activity was 3.6% (IO) and 6.6% (AO) of normal controls. To further validate these findings, the c.1211A>G sequence variant was introduced in wild type GAA cDNA and over-expressed in HEK293T cells. Site-directed mutagenesis analyses confirmed that the mutation does not affect processing or expression of GAA protein, but rather impairs enzyme function. Similar results were reported for c.1798C>T (p.Arg600Cys), which further supports the biochemical phenotype observed in IO. The third mutation (c.692+5G>T, in intron 3) was predicted to affect normal splicing of the GAA mRNA, and qPCR indeed verified a 4-fold lower mRNA expression in AO. It is concluded that the novel sequence variant c.1211A>G results in full CRIM but significantly lower GAA activity, which in combination with c.1798C>T leads to infantile-onset Pompe disease. We surmise that the difference in disease severity between the two family members in this study is due to a milder effect of the intronic mutation c.692+5G>T (vs. c.1798C>T) on phenotype, partially preserving GAA activity and delaying onset in the proband (paternal grandmother).",3 1 0
"Mutation spectrum of six genes in Chinese phenylketonuria patients obtained through next-generation sequencing. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Biopterin China Computational Biology DNA Mutational Analysis High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans INDEL Mutation Multiplex Polymerase Chain Reaction Mutation Pedigree Phenylketonurias || The identification of gene variants plays an important role in the diagnosis of genetic diseases. To develop a rapid method for the diagnosis of phenylketonuria (PKU) and tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) deficiency, we designed a multiplex, PCR-based primer panel to amplify all the exons and flanking regions (50 bp average) of six PKU-associated genes (PAH, PTS, GCH1, QDPR, PCBD1 and GFRP). The Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM) System was used to detect mutations in all the exons of these six genes. We tested 93 DNA samples from blood specimens from 35 patients and their parents (32 families) and 26 healthy adults. Using strict bioinformatic criteria, this sequencing data provided, on average, 99.14% coverage of the 39 exons at more than 70-fold mean depth of coverage. We found 23 previously documented variants in the PAH gene and six novel mutations in the PAH and PTS genes. A detailed analysis of the mutation spectrum of these patients is described in this study. These results were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. In conclusion, benchtop next-generation sequencing technology can be used to detect mutations in monogenic diseases and can detect both point mutations and indels with high sensitivity, fidelity and throughput at a lower cost than conventional methods in clinical applications.",2 1 3
"Muscle ultrasound in classic infantile and adult Pompe disease: a useful screening tool in adults but not in infants. || Adolescent Adult Age Factors Aged Biopsy Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal Ultrasonography, Doppler Young Adult || A cohort of 4 infantile and 15 adult Pompe patients has been investigated regarding correlation between strength and ultrasound of skeletal musculature. In adults, muscle ultrasound is useful to assess clinical and subclinical involvement of muscles. In this study, visible sonographic changes were found in every clinically affected muscle, using a modified Heckmatt scale. In some muscles morphologic changes preceded weakness. Regarding the anatomical pattern of involvement, our findings do not support the hypothesis of a specific pattern with a higher vulnerability of vastus intermedius than rectus femoris, which has been postulated before. A frequent sparing of triceps brachii could be confirmed. Intramuscular abnormalities occurred in a focal, a diffuse, or an intermediate pattern, with characteristics of both. In contrast to muscular dystrophies, bone echogencity was not markedly decreased in Pompe disease even in an advanced stage. In infants, muscle ultrasound showed no distinct pathology even in clinically severely affected children and should not be used as a screening method for infantile Pompe disease.",1
"Prognostic factors for the late onset Pompe disease with enzyme replacement therapy: from our experience of 4 cases including an autopsy case. || Adolescent Adult Autopsy Child, Preschool Enzyme Replacement Therapy Fatal Outcome Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Hypertension, Pulmonary Male Prognosis Pulmonary Veno-Occlusive Disease alpha-Glucosidases || We report 4 cases of late onset glycogen storage disease type II (GSD II) or Pompe disease (OMIM #232300), under enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with recombinant human acid alpha glucosidase (rh-GAA, OMIM *606800). In these 4 cases, we focused on the case of a 28-years-old man, whose condition at the ERT starting was the worst and resulted in poor prognosis. The autopsy was done under his family's permission, and revealed severe accumulation of glycogen in his muscle, especially diaphragm or iliopsoas, and pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD) which resulted in severe pulmonary hypertension (PH). This is the first report of PVOD as the cause of PH in Pompe disease. We studied this case comparing to another 3 cases of late onset Pompe disease under the same course of ERT in our hospital, and the average data of the group of late onset Pompe disease with severe pulmonary insufficiency receiving ERT, supposed that low score of the body mass index (BMI) on the baseline, the presence of specific genotype (p.R600C), and signs of pulmonary dysfunction suggesting PH (tachypnea, ultrasound cardiography data) were factors that influenced the prognosis. For a better prognosis in the late onset Pompe disease, an early diagnosis for the early start of ERT before the onset of respiratory failure should be important, and the deliberate management and care should be needed even after the ERT start, especially for severe cases including pulmonary dysfunction.",1
"PDZD7 is a modifier of retinal disease and a contributor to digenic Usher syndrome. || Frameshift Mutation Genotype Hearing Loss Homozygote Humans Male Mutation Phenotype Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled Retinitis Pigmentosa Siblings Syndrome Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous recessive disease characterized by hearing loss and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). It frequently presents with unexplained, often intrafamilial, variability of the visual phenotype. Although 9 genes have been linked with Usher syndrome, many patients do not have mutations in any of these genes, suggesting that there are still unidentified genes involved in the syndrome. Here, we have determined that mutations in PDZ domain-containing 7 (PDZD7), which encodes a homolog of proteins mutated in Usher syndrome subtype 1C (USH1C) and USH2D, contribute to Usher syndrome. Mutations in PDZD7 were identified only in patients with mutations in other known Usher genes. In a set of sisters, each with a homozygous mutation in USH2A, a frame-shift mutation in PDZD7 was present in the sister with more severe RP and earlier disease onset. Further, heterozygous PDZD7 mutations were present in patients with truncating mutations in USH2A, G protein-coupled receptor 98 (GPR98; also known as USH2C), and an unidentified locus. We validated the human genotypes using zebrafish, and our findings were consistent with digenic inheritance of PDZD7 and GPR98, and with PDZD7 as a retinal disease modifier in patients with USH2A. Pdzd7 knockdown produced an Usher-like phenotype in zebrafish, exacerbated retinal cell death in combination with ush2a or gpr98, and reduced Gpr98 localization in the region of the photoreceptor connecting cilium. Our data challenge the view of Usher syndrome as a traditional Mendelian disorder and support the reclassification of Usher syndrome as an oligogenic disease.",2 1 3
"Phenotypical variation within 22 families with Pompe disease. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Female Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Phenotype Siblings Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease has a broad clinical spectrum, in which the phenotype is partially explained by the genotype. The aim of this study was to describe phenotypical variation among siblings with non-classic Pompe disease. We hypothesized that siblings and families with the same genotype share more similar phenotypes than the total population of non-classic Pompe patients, and that this might reveal genotype-phenotype correlations. We identified all Dutch families in which two or three siblings were diagnosed with Pompe disease and described genotype, acid α-glucosidase activity, age at symptom onset, presenting symptoms, specific clinical features, mobility and ventilator dependency. We identified 22 families comprising two or three siblings. All carried the most common mutation c.-32-13 T > G in combination with another pathogenic mutation. The median age at symptom onset was 33 years (range 1-62 years). Within sibships symptom onset was either in childhood or in adulthood. The median variation in symptom onset between siblings was nine years (range 0-31 years). Presenting symptoms were similar across siblings in 14 out of 22 families. Limb girdle weakness was most frequently reported. In some families ptosis or bulbar weakness were present in all siblings. A large variation in disease severity (based on wheelchair/ventilator dependency) was observed in 11 families. This variation did not always result from a difference in duration of the disease since a third of the less affected siblings had a longer course of the disease. Enzyme activity could not explain this variation either. In most families male patients were more severely affected. Finally, symptom onset varied substantially in twelve families despite the same GAA genotype. In most families with non-classic Pompe disease siblings share a similar phenotype regarding symptom onset, presenting symptoms and specific clinical features. However, in some families the course and severity of disease varied substantially. This phenotypical variation was also observed in families with identical GAA genotypes. The commonalities and differences indicate that besides genotype, other factors such as epigenetic and environmental effects influence the clinical presentation and disease course.",1
"Molecular diagnosis of German patients with late-onset glycogen storage disease type II. ||  || In patients with late-onset glycogen storage disease type II, one mutation, c.-32-13T>G, in the α-glucosidase (GAA) gene is identified frequently in European populations from different regions along with many rarer mutations. We have performed molecular genetic investigations in 18 German index patients with late-onset disease. The c.-32-13T>G, c.525delT (p.Glu176fsX45), and c.2481+102_2646+31del mutations were detected by PCR/restriction enzyme digest. Other mutations were detected by sequencing. All patients were compound heterozygous and 17 patients harboured the c.-32-13T>G mutation. Seven other previously described mutations (including the c.-32-13T>G) were identified, of which the p.C103G (c.307T>G) and the c.2481+102_2646+31del mutations were present each in three unrelated patients. Sequencing revealed five novel mutations. Genetic testing was able to identify the genetic defects in all patients and screening of the c.-32-13T>G mutation identified 94% of the cases. This is important for quick and reliable diagnosis, especially in view of enzyme replacement. Among the rarer mutations, c.2481+102_2646+31del and p.C103G are rather frequent in Germany.",1
"Atrio-ventricular block requiring pacemaker in patients with late onset Pompe disease. || Adult Age of Onset Atrioventricular Block Echocardiography Fatal Outcome Female France Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Heart Humans Male Middle Aged Pacemaker, Artificial Retrospective Studies || Enzyme replacement therapy consistently improves cardiac function in infantile and juvenile onset patients with Pompe disease and cardiomyopathy, but is apparently not effective in preventing rhythm disorders, an emerging cardiac phenotype in long term survivors. In patients with late onset Pompe disease cardiomyopathy is an exceptional finding while heart rhythm disorders seem to be more frequent. We retrospectively identified, among a cohort of 131 French late onset Pompe disease patients, four patients with severe atrio-ventricular blocks requiring pacemaker implantation. These patients had no other risk factors for cardiovascular diseases or cardiomyopathy. In one patient the atrioventricular block was discovered while still asymptomatic. Cardiac conduction defects are relatively rare in late onset Pompe disease and may occur even in absence of cardiac symptoms or EKG abnormalities. However because of the possible life-threatening complications associated with these conduction defects, cardiac follow-up in patients with late onset Pompe disease should include periodical Holter-EKG monitoring.",1
"The pharmacological chaperone 1-deoxynojirimycin increases the activity and lysosomal trafficking of multiple mutant forms of acid alpha-glucosidase. ||  || Pompe disease is a lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) caused by mutations in the gene that encodes acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA). Recently, small molecule pharmacological chaperones have been shown to increase protein stability and cellular levels for mutant lysosomal enzymes and have emerged as a new therapeutic strategy for the treatment of LSDs. In this study, we characterized the pharmacological chaperone 1-deoxynojirimycin (DNJ) on 76 different mutant forms of GAA identified in Pompe disease. DNJ significantly increased enzyme activity and protein levels for 16 different GAA mutants in patient-derived fibroblasts and in transiently transfected COS-7 cells. Additionally, DNJ increased the processing of these GAA mutants to their mature lysosomal forms, suggesting facilitated trafficking through the secretory pathway. Immunofluorescence microscopy studies showed increased colocalization of GAA with the lysosomal marker LAMP2 after incubation with DNJ, confirming increased lysosomal trafficking. Lastly, a GAA structural model was constructed based on the related eukaryotic glucosidase maltase-glucoamylase. The mutated residues identified in responsive forms of GAA are located throughout most of the structural domains, with half of these residues located in two short regions within the catalytic domain. Taken together, these data support further evaluation of DNJ as a potential treatment for Pompe disease in patients that express responsive forms of GAA.",1 0
"The Molecular Bases of Phenylketonuria (PKU) in New South Wales, Australia: Mutation Profile and Correlation with Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) Responsiveness. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive inborn error of phenylalanine metabolism predominantly caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. Mutation screening was carried out in a large cohort of PKU patients from New South Wales, Australia. Pathogenic mutations were identified in 99% of the alleles screened, with the two most common mutations (p.R408W and IVS12+1G>A) accounting for 30.7% of alleles. Most individuals were compound heterozygotes for previously reported mutations, but four novel mutations (c.163+1G>T, c.164-2A>G, c.461A>T [p.Y154F], and c.510-1G>A) and a novel polymorphism (c.60+62C>T) were also identified. A number of patients have been previously tested for their response to dietary supplementation of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), the cofactor of PAH. Correlation between genotype and the responses revealed that although genotype is a major determinant of BH4 responsiveness, patients with the same genotype may also show disparate responses to this treatment. A clinical and biochemical evaluation should be undertaken to determine the effectiveness of PKU treatment by supplementation of BH4.",3 1
"A rare presentation of childhood pompe disease: cardiac involvement provoked by Epstein-Barr virus infection. || Cardiomegaly Diagnosis, Differential Epstein-Barr Virus Infections Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Myocarditis || Myocarditis attributed to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) as the sole cause is a rare manifestation. Myocarditis ascribed to EBV infection in combination with other factors has been reported in a few more cases. We report a child who experienced active EBV infection and later, at 19 months of age, received a diagnosis of Pompe disease (acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency) with predominant cardiac involvement. The cardiac symptoms resolved at the end of the EBV infection. When the patient was recently seen, at 8 years of age, she had an increased left ventricular wall thickness but normal cardiac function. DNA analysis identified this patient as compound heterozygote for a mutant Tyr292Cys and a null allele. In light of genotype-phenotype correlation, it is notable that a Spanish patient with a functionally similar genotype (Tyr292Cys/Arg854Stop) also had childhood Pompe disease with peripheral muscular involvement.",1 0
"Clinical manifestation of late onset Pompe disease patients in Hong Kong. || Adolescent Adult Asian Continental Ancestry Group Child Female Genetic Association Studies Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Hong Kong Humans Incidence Male Young Adult || Late onset Pompe disease is a rare inherited metabolic disease with diverse clinical manifestation. However, there is a lack of local data in Hong Kong. We aimed at performing an in-depth review of natural history of all patients in Hong Kong. Eleven patients were diagnosed to have the disease in Hong Kong from 2000 to 2013. All case records were reviewed and face-to-face interviews were conducted to complete a questionnaire regarding the clinical manifestation and diagnosis of the disease. The estimated birth incidence was 1/300,000. The age of diagnosis ranged from 9 to 44 years; all patients were ethnic Chinese. The median ages of first symptoms and first medical attention were 20.5(6-44) and 29(9-44) years respectively. The most common initial complaint was decreased exercise tolerance. Two patients' first complaint was difficulty with getting up from lying position and failure to perform sit up. The mean time from first medical attention to diagnosis was 1.3 years but one patient was diagnosed 8 years later. Half of the patients sought medical attention due to progressive shortness of breath and all of them developed type 2 respiratory failure requiring ventilator support during the first admission. Two patients became chair-bound and seven patients required assisted ventilation. Late onset Pompe disease tends to have an earlier and more aggressive clinical presentation in Chinese and lower birth incidence was found in Hong Kong.",3 1
"Identification of 11 novel mutations in USH2A among Japanese patients with Usher syndrome type 2. || Adult Asian Continental Ancestry Group DNA Mutational Analysis DNA Primers Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Humans Japan Male Middle Aged Mutation Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome (USH) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by retinitis pigmentosa and hearing loss. USH type 2 (USH2) is the most common type of USH and is frequently caused by mutations in USH2A, which accounts for 74-90% of USH2 cases. This is the first study reporting the results of scanning for USH2A mutations in Japanese patients with USH2. In 8 of 10 unrelated patients, we identified 14 different mutations. Of these mutations, 11 were novel. Although the mutation spectrum that we identified differed from that for Caucasians, the incidence of mutations in USH2A was 80% for all patients tested, which is consistent with previous findings. Further, c.8559-2A>G was identified in four patients and accounted for 26.7% of mutated alleles; it is thus a frequent mutation in Japanese patients. Hence, mutation screening for c.8559-2A>G in USH2A may prove very effective for the early diagnosis of USH2.",1
"Concurrent Genetic and Standard Screening for Hearing Impairment in 9317 Southern Chinese Newborns. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group China Connexins Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Hearing Loss Humans Infant, Newborn Male Membrane Transport Proteins Sulfate Transporters || The goal of this study was to investigate the use of concurrent genetic screening together with standard newborn hearing screening (NHS) in an effort to provide a scientific basis for the beneficial use of concurrent genetic hearing screening in newborns. Our aim was to improve the neonatal detection rate of hearing impairment and the potential for hearing loss, allowing for increased early intervention and potentially allowing for prevention of later onset hearing loss. This information could also be used to increase the effectiveness of genetic counseling regarding hearing impairment. A total of 9317 neonates from Children's Hospital of Dongguan and Dongguan People's Hospital were included in this study between January 2015 and October 2015. Twenty hotspot hearing-associated mutations of four common deafness- susceptibility genes (GJB2, GJB3, SLC26A4, and MTRNR1) were analyzed by matrix-assisted laser desorption-ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS). The results of genetic screening and NHS were concurrently analyzed. A total of 129 infants (1.38%) exhibited hearing loss as determined by otoacoustic emission (OAE) testing. The genetic screening revealed that 348 (3.74%) individuals had at least one mutant allele. In total, 34 (0.36%) of the neonates carried a causal complement of mutations. The overwhelming majority of the genetically referred newborns passed the OAE hearing screening, but could be at risk for later hearing loss. This study furthers the understanding of the etiology of hearing loss and proves that it is beneficial to use genetic screening along with OAE screening of neonates to improve detection rates of at-risk infants. Our results show that this concurrent testing allows for better early identification of infants at risk for hearing loss, which may occur before speech and language development. Prevention of hearing loss can be achieved by avoiding the use of antibiotics containing amino glycosides in infants whose mutations make them extremely sensitive to these antibiotics. This information is also useful in genetic counseling, providing region-specific mutation information.",1
"Report of the first Brazilian infantile Pompe disease patient to be treated with recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase. ||  || To describe the first case of infantile Pompe disease to be treated in Brazil. Pompe disease is a glycogen storage disease related to defects in the acid alpha-glucosidase enzyme, leading to an intracellular accumulation of glycogen, mainly in muscles. Two forms are described: infantile and juvenile. Since 2006, treatment with recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase has been available. This article describes the first case of infantile Pompe disease treated in Brazil. A girl presented at 2.5 months of age with rapid disease progression, exhibiting severe hypotonia, loss of movements in both upper and lower limbs and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, progressing to respiratory failure by the age of 7 months. After 10 months of treatment, she exhibited a good clinical response, with remission of the respiratory failure, partial recovery of arm and leg movements and improvement of cardiologic condition. Despite its low incidence, infantile Pompe disease is lethal. The availability of an effective treatment has created an urgent need to improve knowledge and early diagnosis of this disease.",1
"Late-Onset Glycogen Storage Disease Type II (Pompe's Disease) with a Novel Mutation: A Malaysian Experience. ||  || Pompe's disease (acid maltase deficiency, glycogen storage disease type II) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a deficiency of lysosomal acid α-1,4-glucosidase, resulting in excessive accumulation of glycogen in the lysosomes and cytoplasm of all tissues, most notably in skeletal muscles. We present a case of adult-onset Pompe's disease with progressive proximal muscles weakness over 5 years and respiratory failure on admission, requiring prolonged mechanical ventilation. Electromyography showed evidence of myopathic process with small amplitudes, polyphasic motor unit action potentials, and presence of pseudomyotonic discharges. Muscle biopsy showed glycogen-containing vacuoles in the muscle fibers consistent with glycogen storage disease. Genetic analysis revealed two compound heterozygous mutations at c.444C>G (p.Tyr148∗) in exon 2 and c.2238G>C (p.Trp746Cys) in exon 16, with the former being a novel mutation. This mutation has not been reported before, to our knowledge. The patient was treated with high protein diet during the admission and subsequently showed good clinical response to enzyme replacement therapy with survival now to the eighth year. Conclusion. In patients with late-onset adult Pompe's disease, careful evaluation and early identification of the disease and its treatment with high protein diet and enzyme replacement therapy improve muscle function and have beneficial impact on long term survival.",1
The p.Arg118Cys Variant in the GLA Gene Does Not Cause Fabry Disease. More Evidence. || Biopsy DNA Echocardiography Electrocardiography Fabry Disease Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Myocardium Pedigree alpha-Galactosidase || ,2 1
"Reassessment of Mendelian gene pathogenicity using 7,855 cardiomyopathy cases and 60,706 reference samples. || Cardiomyopathies Computational Biology Databases, Genetic Exome Genetic Diseases, Inborn Genetic Testing Genetic Variation Genome, Human High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Mutation Whole Exome Sequencing || The accurate interpretation of variation in Mendelian disease genes has lagged behind data generation as sequencing has become increasingly accessible. Ongoing large sequencing efforts present huge interpretive challenges, but they also provide an invaluable opportunity to characterize the spectrum and importance of rare variation. We analyzed sequence data from 7,855 clinical cardiomyopathy cases and 60,706 Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) reference samples to obtain a better understanding of genetic variation in a representative autosomal dominant disorder. We found that in some genes previously reported as important causes of a given cardiomyopathy, rare variation is not clinically informative because there is an unacceptably high likelihood of false-positive interpretation. By contrast, in other genes, we find that diagnostic laboratories may be overly conservative when assessing variant pathogenicity. We outline improved analytical approaches that evaluate which genes and variant classes are interpretable and propose that these will increase the clinical utility of testing across a range of Mendelian diseases.Genet Med 19 2, 192-203.",3 1 4
"Genetic analysis through OtoSeq of Pakistani families segregating prelingual hearing loss. || Alleles Cadherins Female Genetic Linkage Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genotype Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Membrane Transport Proteins Microsatellite Repeats Mutation Myosins Pakistan Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction Prospective Studies Sulfate Transporters Usher Syndromes || To identify the genetic cause of prelingual sensorineural hearing loss in Pakistani families using a next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based mutation screening test named OtoSeq. Prospective study. Research laboratory. We used 3 fluorescently labeled short tandem repeat (STR) markers for each of the known autosomal recessive nonsyndromic (DFNB) and Usher syndrome (USH) locus to perform a linkage analysis of 243 multigenerational Pakistani families segregating prelingual hearing loss. After genotyping, we focused on 34 families with potential linkage to MYO7A, CDH23, and SLC26A4. We screened affected individuals from a subset of these families using the OtoSeq platform to identify underlying genetic variants. Sanger sequencing was performed to confirm and study the segregation of mutations in other family members. For novel mutations, normal hearing individuals from ethnically matched backgrounds were also tested. Hearing loss was found to co-segregate with locus-specific STR markers for MYO7A in 32 families, CDH23 in 1 family, and SLC26A4 in 1 family. Using the OtoSeq platform, a microdroplet PCR-based enrichment followed by NGS, we identified mutations in 28 of the 34 families including 11 novel mutations. Sanger sequencing of these mutations showed 100% concordance with NGS data and co-segregation of the mutant alleles with the hearing loss phenotype in the respective families. Using NGS-based platforms like OtoSeq in families segregating hearing loss will contribute to the identification of common and population-specific mutations, early diagnosis, genetic counseling, and molecular epidemiology.",2 1
"Acute progression of neuromuscular findings in infantile Pompe disease. || Brain Disease Progression Electromyography Fatal Outcome Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Magnetic Resonance Imaging Muscle Weakness Muscle, Skeletal Nerve Fibers, Myelinated Respiratory Paralysis || A 2-year-old girl with Pompe disease developed an acute worsening of muscle weakness during a hospitalization, and required intubation for an upper respiratory infection. Electromyography and nerve conduction studies produced results consistent with a severe chronic motor axonal peripheral polyneuropathy, with no evidence of reinnervation. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain demonstrated generalized hypomyelination and parenchymal volume loss, whereas magnetic resonance spectroscopy suggested neuronal injury and hypomyelination. This case provides compelling evidence for a slowly progressive neurodegenerative process in patients with infantile Pompe disease, affecting the motor neurons. Routine electromyography, nerve conduction studies, and cranial magnetic resonance imaging should be considered to delineate the presence of a neurodegenerative process in infantile-onset Pompe disease.",1
"A novel mutation of the GAA gene in a patient with adult-onset Pompe disease lacking a disease-specific pathology. || Age of Onset Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence DNA Mutational Analysis Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Heterozygote Humans Male Point Mutation Young Adult || We herein report a novel compound heterozygous mutation of the acid α-glucosidase (GAA) gene in a 23-year-old man with adult-onset Pompe disease. The patient was admitted for respiratory failure and a highly elevated serum level of creatine kinase (CK). His muscle pathology did not show typical vacuolated fibers; however, globular inclusion bodies with acid phosphatase (ACP) activity was observed. A molecular genetic analysis of the GAA gene revealed a novel compound heterozygous mutation, c.1544 T>A (M515K), combined with a previously reported mutation, c.1309 C>T (R437C). The presence of ACP-positive globular inclusion bodies is a useful diagnostic marker for adult-onset Pompe disease, even when typical vacuolated fibers are absent.",1
"Adult-onset glycogen storage disease type 2: clinico-pathological phenotype revisited. || Adolescent Adult Age Factors Age of Onset Aged Biopsy Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunohistochemistry Infant Male Microscopy, Electron, Transmission Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal Mutation Phenotype alpha-Glucosidases || The need for clinical awareness and diagnostic precision of glycogen storage disease type 2 (GSD2) has increased, as enzyme replacement therapy has become available. So far, only small series have reported the muscle pathology of late-onset GSD2. We reassessed 43 muscle biopsies of 38 GSD2 patients. In all patients the diagnosis of GSD2 has been established by biochemistry and/or mutational analysis of the GAA gene. Additionally to the expected morphological features, ultrastructural analysis revealed a high incidence of autophagic vacuoles, lipofuscin debris, structural Z-line disorganization and histological neurogenic-like pattern that were not thoroughly appreciated, previously. Comparing age at onset and morphology, excessive vacuolar and autophagic myopathy and mitochondrial disorganization of virtually all fibres is common in infants. At juvenile onset, a more moderate vacuolization without significant differences in overall morphology is notable. At late-onset, the spectrum of vacuolar myopathy is more divergent, ranging from almost normal to severe. Here pronounced secondary alterations are observed that include lipofuscin debris, autophagic vacuoles with residual lysosomal bodies and granular inclusions, structural mitochondrial and Z-line texture alterations. Moreover, there is a high incidence of subtle neurogenic-like alteration in all subtypes. Nineteen patients were genetically tested; in 15 patients the common leaky splicing mutation c.-45T>G (or IVS1-13T>G) in intron1 of the GAA gene was found on at least one allele, facilitating genetic screening. In our patients, GAA genotype appears not to be associated with secondary alterations such as autophagic vacuoles, structural alterations or neurogenic-like changes. These findings may have implications for our understanding of the pathogenesis of GSD2 and for assessing therapeutic success of enzyme replacement therapy.",1
"Three patients with glycogen storage disease type II and the mutational spectrum of GAA in Korean patients. || Adolescent Child DNA Female Genetic Therapy Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Republic of Korea alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease II (GSD II) is caused by a deficiency of acid alpha-1,4-glucosidase and mutations in the GAA gene encoding this enzyme which are responsible for the pathogenesis of GSD II. Our goal was to determine the mutational spectrum in the GAA gene in Korean patients with GSD II. Three patients with GSD II were recruited based on clinical and biochemical findings. Alpha-1,4-glucosidase activity was determined and the GAA gene sequence was analyzed by PCR and sequencing. We also collected information about the genotypes of Korean patients with GSD II from the medical literature. We identified six mutant alleles among the three GSD II patients: c.875A>G, c.1156C>T, c.1316T>A, c.1857C>G, and c2407_2412del7. c.1156C>T (Q386*) is a novel mutation. A comprehensive review of the literature revealed that a total of 29 mutant alleles, including 15 different mutations (10 missense, 3 deletion, and 2 nonsense mutations), were previously identified in 15 Korean GSD II patients. c.1316T>A (p.M439K) and c.1857C>G (p.S619R) were the most common mutations and accounted for 36.6% of the total mutant alleles. We identified three GSD II patients and investigated the mutational spectrum in GAA in Korean patients with GSD II. Our results indicate that common mutations in the GAA gene vary according to ethnic background.",1
"Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Mexico: genotype-phenotype correlations, BH4 responsiveness and evidence of a founder effect. || Biopterin Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Founder Effect Genetic Association Studies Haplotypes Humans Mexico Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Treatment Outcome || The mutational spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) in Mexico is unknown, although it has been suggested that PKU variants could have a differential geographical distribution. Genotype-phenotype correlations and genotype-based predictions of responsiveness to tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4 ) have never been performed. We sequenced the PAH gene and determined the geographic origin of each allele, mini-haplotype associated, genotype-phenotype correlations and genotype-based prediction of BH4 responsiveness in 48 Mexican patients. The mutational spectrum included 34 variants with c.60+5G>T being the most frequent (20.8%) and linked to haplotype 4.3 possibly because of a founder effect and/or genetic drift. Two new variants were found c.1A>T and c.969+6T>C. The genotype-phenotype correlation was concordant in 70.8%. The genotype-based prediction to BH4 -responsiveness was 41.7%, this information could be useful for the rational selection of candidates for BH4 testing and therapy.",3 1
"Clinical and Molecular Characterization of Infantile-Onset Pompe Disease in Mainland Chinese Patients: Identification of Two Common Mutations. || Alleles Asian Continental Ancestry Group China Female Gene Frequency Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction alpha-Glucosidases || We sought to understand the clinical course and molecular defects of infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD) among mainland Chinese patients. Twenty-five Chinese patients with IOPD were enrolled and clinical data were retrospectively reviewed. The entire coding region of the GAA gene was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and analyzed by direct sequencing. The median age at symptom onset was 3.4 months (range: 1.0-7.1 months) and 4.9 months (range: 2.7-8.3 months) at diagnosis. Only one patient received enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) and this child survived beyond the age of 2 years. Of the 24 patients not receiving ERT, all, but one patient, died at a median age of 8.3 months (range: 4.0-12.2 months). Thirteen novel and two common GAA mutations were identified in this study. The allelic frequency of c.2662G > T (p.Glu888X) was 23.1% in northern Chinese patients and 4.2% in southern Chinese patients, whereas the allelic frequency of c.1935C > A (p.Asp645Glu) was 20.8% in southern and 3.8% in northern Chinese patients. We identified the most common mutations in southern and northern Chinese patients with IOPD.",1 4
"Tetrahydrobiopterin as an alternative treatment for mild phenylketonuria. || Adolescent Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Molecular Conformation Mutation, Missense Oxidation-Reduction Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Prospective Studies || Hyperphenylalaninemia is a common inherited metabolic disease that is due to phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency, and at least half the affected patients have mild clinical phenotypes. Treatment with a low-phenylalanine diet represents a substantial psychosocial burden, but alternative treatments have not been effective. To explore the therapeutic efficacy of tetrahydrobiopterin, we performed a combined phenylalanine-tetrahydrobiopterin loading test and analyzed the in vivo rates of [13C]phenylalanine oxidation in 38 children with phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency (age range, 1 day to 17 years). We assessed whether responsiveness to tetrahydrobiopterin was associated with specific genotypes, and we mapped mutations using a structural model of the phenylalanine hydroxylase monomer. In 27 (87 percent) of 31 patients with mild hyperphenylalaninemia (10 patients) or mild phenylketonuria (21 patients), tetrahydrobiopterin significantly lowered blood phenylalanine levels. Phenylalanine oxidation was significantly enhanced in 23 of these 31 patients (74 percent). Conversely, none of the seven patients with classic phenylketonuria had a response to tetrahydrobiopterin as defined in this study. Long-term treatment with tetrahydrobiopterin in five children increased daily phenylalanine tolerance, allowing them to discontinue their restricted diets. Seven mutations (P314S, Y417H, V177M, V245A, A300S, E390G, and IVS4-5C-->G) were classified as probably associated with responsiveness to tetrahydrobiopterin, and six mutations (A403V, F39L, D415N, S310Y, R158Q, and I65T) were classified as potentially associated. Four mutations (Y414C, L48S, R261Q, and I65V) were inconsistently associated with this phenotype. Mutations connected to tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness were predominantly in the catalytic domain of the protein and were not directly involved in cofactor binding. Tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness is common in patients with mild hyperphenylalaninemia phenotypes. Responsiveness cannot consistently be predicted on the basis of genotype, particularly in compound heterozygotes.",3 1
"Non-phenylketonuria hyperphenylalaninaemia in Northern Ireland: frequent mutation allows screening and early diagnosis. ||  || Up to 10% of newborn children with a positive Guthrie test have non-phenylketonuria hyperphenylalaninaemia, i.e., mild elevation of serum phenylalanine that does not require dietary treatment. Depending on the relative frequencies of different phenylalanine hydroxylase mutations in a particular population, non-PKU HPA is usually caused by the combined effect of a mild HPA mutation and a severe PKU mutation. Presented here is a comprehensive analysis of non-PKU HPA in Northern Ireland. Of particular interest is one prevalent HPA mutation (T380M), which is present in over 70% of non-PKU HPA patients in Northern Ireland. Screening for this mutation is easy and inexpensive and can help confirm the diagnosis of non-PKU hyperphenylalaninaemia in the majority of cases at a very early stage. This may be clinically useful and reassuring for the parents. Other mutations described are V245A, L194P, and E390G.",3 1
"Late-onset pompe disease in Iran: A clinical and genetic report. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool Consanguinity Electromyography Evoked Potentials, Motor Family Health Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Iran Male Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal Mutation Respiration Disorders Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is characterized by absence or deficiency of acid α-glucosidase, and several causative mutations are known. In this study we report clinical and laboratory data in Iranian patients with late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD), focusing on population-specific mutations. Clinical and laboratory data of 14 patients from 10 families with the diagnosis of LOPD were recorded. All had reduced enzyme activity on dried blood spot (DBS) analysis. Genetic investigation was performed to identify the underlying mutations. The age of onset ranged from <2 to 38 years. The clinical presentations were heterogeneous. Two siblings presented with foot drop. The most common mutation was c.(-32-13T>G). There were 4 novel mutations: c.(2040 + 2dup); c.(1650delG); c.(1837T>G); and c.(2596delG). This is a comprehensive report of LOPD in Iranian patients. Distinct phenotypic and genotypic features in this population are highlighted. Muscle Nerve 55: 835-840, 2017.",3 1
"Genotype-phenotype correlations analysis of mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. || Amino Acid Sequence Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence Genotype Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Sequence Deletion || The aims of our research were to define the genotype-phenotype correlations of mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene that cause phenylketonuria (PKU) among the Israeli population. The mutation spectrum of the PAH gene in PKU patients in Israel is described, along with a discussion on genotype-phenotype correlations. By using polymerase chain reaction/denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (PCR/dHPLC) and DNA sequencing, we screened all exons of the PAH gene in 180 unrelated patients with four different PKU phenotypes [classic PKU, moderate PKU, mild PKU, and mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP)]. In 63.2% of patient genotypes, the metabolic phenotype could be predicted, though evidence is also found for both phenotypic inconsistencies among subjects with more than one type of mutation in the PAH gene. Data analysis revealed that about 25% of patients could participate in the future in (6R)-L: -erythro-5, 6, 7, 8-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) treatment trials according to their mutation genotypes. This study enables us to construct a national database in Israel that will serve as a valuable tool for genetic counseling and a prognostic evaluation of future cases of PKU.",3 1
"A novel mutation of the GAA gene in a Finnish late-onset Pompe disease patient: clinical phenotype and follow-up with enzyme replacement therapy. || DNA Mutational Analysis Electrocardiography Electromyography Electrons Female Finland Follow-Up Studies Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Magnetic Resonance Imaging Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy Muscle, Skeletal Mutation Radionuclide Imaging Recombinant Proteins Tyrosine Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is a rare, progressive disease leading to skeletal muscle weakness due to deficiency of the acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) enzyme. Herein we report the first diagnosed Finnish patient with a phenotype compatible with the late-onset form of Pompe disease. Molecular genetic analysis of the GAA gene revealed a novel missense mutation, 1725C>A (Y575X), combined with a previously reported mutation, 1634C>T (P545L). Human recombinant alpha-glucosidase enzyme (alglucosidase-alpha) treatment was initiated for this patient at age 20 years. After 12 months she was no longer fully wheelchair-bound, and muscle strength had improved. No disease progression was visible on muscle magnetic resonance imaging of the lower limbs, and the energy state of the muscle cells increased by 46% on phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Overall, our findings suggest that enzyme replacement therapy is indicated, even in patients with late-onset Pompe disease, to halt disease progression and improve the quality of daily life.",1
"Phenylketonuria in The Netherlands: 93% of the mutations are detected by single-strand conformation analysis. ||  || Single-strand conformational analysis was used to screen for genetic defects in all thirteen exons of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) in phenylketonuria and hyperphenylalaninemia patients in the Netherlands. Exons that showed a bandshift were sequenced directly. In this way, we were able to identify 93% of the PAH mutations in a panel of 34 patients. Twenty-one different mutations were found: 4 of these gene aberrations are novel.",3 1
"Metabolic phenotypes of phenylketonuria. Kinetic and molecular evaluation of the Blaskovics protein loading test. ||  || As part of the German Collaborative Study of Children Treated for Phenylketonuria (PKU), a three-day protein loading test was applied to children at 6 months of age. This load elicits three principal types of blood phenylalanine (Phe) response, with types I and III clinically corresponding to classic PKU and mild hyperphenylalaninaemia not requiring diet (MHP), respectively. An intermediate type II, clinically corresponding to mild PKU, is characterized by early decline of blood Phe from above 1200 micromol/L down to levels between 600 and 1200 micromol/L at 72 h. Unbiased classification and kinetic and molecular characterization of the intermediate Phe response; estimation of phenotypic variability of Phe disposal. A kinetic model with zero-order protein synthesis and first-order rate of metabolic disposal of Phe is applied to 157 tests. A model of exponentially saturated activation describes the acceleration of Phe disposal from day 1 to 3 in the intermediate type of response. Eleven of 14 p.Y414C functional hemizygotes and two of three p.R261Q homozygotes manifested this kinetic type. The rate estimates of Phe metabolic disposal differ widely in patients with identical PAH genotype, yet are highly correlated with the Phe level at 72 h.",1
"Clinical and molecular genetic study of infantile-onset Pompe disease in Chinese patients: identification of 6 novel mutations. || Age of Onset Base Sequence China DNA Primers Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Mutation Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive disorder and is caused by a deficiency in acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA). A broad range of studies have been performed on Pompe patients from different countries. However, the clinical course and molecular basis of the disease in Mainland China have not been well defined. In the present study, we examined a total of 18 Chinese children with infantile-onset Pompe disease to better understand the clinical and genetic features in this population. The median age at symptom onset was 3.6 months (range: 1.7-6.8 months) and 6.3 months at diagnosis (range: 2.5-9.3 months). All but 1 patient died at a median age of 8.2 months (range: 4.7-18.7 months). Molecular analysis revealed 20 different mutations, 6 of which are novel (c.1356delC, c.378G>A, c.1827C>G, c.859-2 A>T, c.1551+2T>G, and c.1465G>T). The most common mutation in the study was c.1935C>A, accounting for 25% (9/36 alleles) of the mutations. Our study provides the first comprehensive examination of the clinical course of infantile-onset Pompe disease and mutations of the GAA gene for patients in Mainland China. Our results confirm the high prevalence of the c.1935C>A mutation, previously reported for other populations, in Mainland Chinese patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease. Furthermore, six novel mutations in the GAA gene are reported for the first time.",1
"Phenylketonuria mutation analysis in Northern Ireland: a rapid stepwise approach. ||  || We present a multistep approach for the rapid analysis of phenylketonuria (PKU) mutations. In the first step, three common mutations and a polymorphic short tandem repeat (STR) system are rapidly analyzed with a fluorescent multiplex assay. In the second step, minihaplotypes combining STR and VNTR data are used to determine rare mutations likely to be present in an investigated patient, which are then confirmed by restriction enzyme analysis. The remaining mutations are analyzed with denaturant gradient-gel electrophoresis and sequencing. The first two steps together identify both mutations in 90%-95% of PKU patients, and results can be obtained within 2 d. We have investigated 121 Northern Irish families with hyperphenylalaninemia, including virtually all patients born since 1972, and have found 34 different mutations on 241 of the 242 mutant alleles. Three mutations (R408W, I65T, and F39L) account for 57.5% of mutations, while 14 mutations occur with a frequency of 1%-6%. The present analysis system is efficient and inexpensive and is particularly well suited to routine mutation analysis in a diagnostic setting.",3 1
"The influence of mutations in the SLC26A4 gene on the temporal bone in a population with enlarged vestibular aqueduct. ||  || To correlate genetic and audiometric findings with a detailed radiologic analysis of the temporal bone in patients with enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA) to ascertain the contribution of SLC26A4 gene mutations to this phenotype. A retrospective review of patients with EVA identified in a database of pediatric hearing-impaired patients. A tertiary care pediatric referral center. Seventy-one children with EVA and screening results for SLC26A4 mutations. Genetic screening results, audiometric thresholds, and radiographic temporal bone measurements. Seventy-one children with EVA were screened for SLC26A4 mutations. Mutations were found in 27% of children overall, while only 8% had biallelic mutations. The mean initial pure-tone average (PTA) was 59 dB; the mean final PTA was 67 dB. A bilateral EVA was found in 48 (67%) of the children; a unilateral EVA was found in 23 (33%). Progressive hearing loss (in at least 1 ear) was seen in 29 (41%) of the patients. The strongest genotype-phenotype interaction was seen in children with a bilateral EVA. Among children with SLC26A4 mutations, there was a significantly wider vestibular aqueduct at the midpoint and a wider vestibule width (P < .05) than in children without the mutation. Among patients with a bilateral EVA, children with any SLC26A4 mutation were more likely to have a more severe final PTA (64 dB vs 32 dB), larger midpoint measurement (2.1 vs 1.1 mm), and larger operculum measurement (3.0 vs 2.0 mm) than those without the mutation in their better-hearing ear (P < .05). In a population of pediatric patients with an EVA and hearing loss, SLC26A4 mutations are a contributor to the phenotype. Our data suggest that other genetic factors also have important contributions to this phenotype. The presence of an abnormal SLC26A4 allele, even in the heterozygous state, was associated with greater enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct, abnormal development of the vestibule, and possibly a stable hearing outcome.",1
"Evaluation of genotype-phenotype relationships in patients referred for endocrine assessment in suspected Pendred syndrome. ||  || Patients with Pendred syndrome have genotypic and phenotypic variability, leading to challenges in definitive diagnosis. Deaf children with enlarged vestibular aqueducts are often subjected to repeated investigations when tests for mutations in SLC26A4 are abnormal. This study provides genotype and phenotype information from patients with suspected Pendred syndrome referred to a single clinical endocrinology unit. A retrospective analysis of 50 patients with suspected Pendred syndrome to investigate the correlation between genetic, perchlorate discharge test (PDT) and endocrine status. Eight patients with monoallelic SLC26A4 mutations had normal PDT. Of the 33 patients with biallelic mutations, ten of 12 patients with >30% discharge developed hypothyroidism. In our cohort, c.626G>T and c.3-2A>G result in milder clinical presentations with lower median perchlorate discharge of 9.3% (interquartile range 4-15%) compared with 40% (interquartile range 21-60%) for the remaining mutations. Eight novel mutations were detected. All patients with PDT <30% remained euthyroid to date, although the majority are still under the age of 30. There was a significant correlation between PDT and goitre size (R=0.61, P=0.0009) and the age of onset of hypothyroidism (R=-0.62, P=0.0297). In our population, the hazard of becoming hypothyroid increased by 7% per percentage point increase in PDT (P<0.001). There is a correlation between SLC26A4 genotype and thyroid phenotype. If results hold true for larger patient numbers and longer follow-up, then for patients with monoallelic mutations, PDT could be unnecessary. Patients with biallelic mutations and PDT discharge >30% have a high risk of developing goitre and hypothyroidism, and should have lifelong monitoring.",1
"Sensitivity of whole exome sequencing in detecting infantile- and late-onset Pompe disease. || Diagnosis, Differential Enzyme Replacement Therapy Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Late Onset Disorders Mutation Phenotype Sensitivity and Specificity Whole Exome Sequencing alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is a metabolic myopathy with a wide spectrum of clinical presentation. The gold-standard diagnostic test is acid alpha-glucosidase assay on skin fibroblasts, muscle or blood. Identification of two GAA pathogenic variants in-trans is confirmatory. Optimal effectiveness of enzyme replacement therapy hinges on early diagnosis, which is challenging in late-onset form of the disease due to non-specific presentation. Next-generation sequencing-based panels effectively facilitate diagnosis, but the sensitivity of whole-exome sequencing (WES) in detecting pathogenic GAA variants remains unknown. We analyzed WES data from 93 patients with confirmed Pompe disease and GAA genotypes based on PCR/Sanger sequencing. After ensuring that the common intronic variant c.-32-13T>G is not filtered out, whole-exome sequencing identified both GAA pathogenic variants in 77/93 (83%) patients. However, one variant was missed in 14/93 (15%), and both variants were missed in 2/93 (2%). One complex indel leading to a severe phenotype was incorrectly called a nonsynonymous substitution c.-32-13T>C due to misalignment. These results demonstrate that WES may fail to diagnose Pompe disease. Clinicians need to be aware of limitations of WES, and consider tests specific to Pompe disease when WES does not provide a diagnosis in patients with proximal myopathy, progressive respiratory failure or other subtle symptoms.",1 4
"Slow, progressive myopathy in neonatally treated patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease: a muscle magnetic resonance imaging study. || Child Child, Preschool Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Muscle, Skeletal Muscular Diseases || Patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD) can be identified through newborn screening, and the subsequent immediate initiation of enzyme replacement therapy significantly improves the prognosis of these patients. However, they still present residual muscle weakness. In the present study, we used longitudinal muscle magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to determine whether this condition is progressive. A cohort of classic IOPD patients who were diagnosed through newborn screening were treated with recombinant human acid α-glucosidase (rhGAA) and followed prospectively from birth. The trunk (and abdominal wall), pelvis and upper thighs were scanned for muscle MRI every 2-3 years. Seven groups of muscles were individually scored from 0 to 4 based on the extent of their involvement, and the sum was correlated to the clinical manifestations. Twenty-four MRI scans from a total of 12 neonatally treated IOPD patients were analyzed in the present study. The median age at the time of MRI scanning was 4.2 years (13 days to 9 years). High intensity over the quadriceps on T2-weighted and short-tau inversion recovery images was observed in all scans and was followed by a decrease in muscle mass. Trunk muscle involvement was slower, except in one patient who exhibited progressive psoas atrophy. Among the 10 patients for whom follow-up scans were repeated more than 2 years after the first scan, four patients (40 %) showed increased myopathy severity. This prospective muscle MRI study provides evidence for the occurrence of slow, progressive muscle damage in neonatally treated IOPD patients during childhood. New treatment strategies are necessary to improve outcomes in these patients.",1
"Origins and frequencies of SLC26A4 (PDS) mutations in east and south Asians: global implications for the epidemiology of deafness. || Asia, Southeastern Carrier Proteins Chromosomes, Human, Pair 7 DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Deafness Family Health Female Gene Frequency Genes, Recessive Haplotypes Humans Korea Male Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Mutation, Missense Pedigree Physical Chromosome Mapping Sulfate Transporters || Recessive mutations of SLC26A4 (PDS) are a common cause of Pendred syndrome and non-syndromic deafness in western populations. Although south and east Asia contain nearly one half of the global population, the origins and frequencies of SLC26A4 mutations in these regions are unknown. We PCR amplified and sequenced seven exons of SLC26A4 to detect selected mutations in 274 deaf probands from Korea, China, and Mongolia. A total of nine different mutations of SLC26A4 were detected among 15 (5.5%) of the 274 probands. Five mutations were novel and the other four had seldom, if ever, been identified outside east Asia. To identify mutations in south Asians, 212 Pakistani and 106 Indian families with three or more affected offspring of consanguineous matings were analysed for cosegregation of recessive deafness with short tandem repeat markers linked to SLC26A4. All 21 SLC26A4 exons were PCR amplified and sequenced in families segregating SLC26A4 linked deafness. Eleven mutant alleles of SLC26A4 were identified among 17 (5.4%) of the 318 families, and all 11 alleles were novel. SLC26A4 linked haplotypes on chromosomes with recurrent mutations were consistent with founder effects. Our observation of a diverse allelic series unique to each ethnic group indicates that mutational events at SLC26A4 are common and account for approximately 5% of recessive deafness in south Asians and other populations.",1
"Molecular epidemiology and genotype-phenotype correlation in phenylketonuria patients from South Spain. || Adolescent Alleles Child Child, Preschool Female Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Male Molecular Epidemiology Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Spain || The aim of this study was to identify the most common genotypes in the phenylketonuria (PKU) population of Andalusia, assessing the correlation with the phenotype and the usefulness in predicting the response to treatment with tetrahydrobiopterin. We conducted a retrospective observational study between January 1980 and January 2010 in 147 Andalusian PKU patients assessing phenotype, genotype and response to a 24-h BH4 loading test. Our cohort of patients exhibited 65 different mutations, 69.2% corresponding to the missense type, in a total of 123 different genotypes. IVS10nt-11g>a was the most common mutation (10.9%). Four novel missense mutations were identified: p.L258P; p.E66K, p.R155C and p.P122S. Although generally there is a good genotype-phenotype correlation, for eight of the repeated genotypes a slightly different phenotype was observed. In 96 PKU subjects BH4 challenge was carried out. Patients with previously reported unresponsive mutations on both alleles showed a negative response, while 95.5% (28/29) of the responsive patients carry at least one missense mutation previously associated to the BH4. Our data reveal a great genetic heterogeneity in the Andalusian population. Genotype is quite a good predictor of the phenotype and of the responsiveness to tetrahydrobiopterin, which is relevant for patient management and follow-up.",3 1 0
"Distinct disease phenotypes linked to different combinations of GAA mutations in a large late-onset GSDII sibship. || Adolescent Adult Bone Density Child Electrophysiology Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogenosis type II (GSDII or Pompe disease) is an autosomal recessive disease, often characterized by a progressive accumulation of glycogen within lysosomes caused by a deficiency of α-1,4-glucosidase (GAA; acid maltase), a key enzyme of the glycogen degradation pathway. To date, more than 326 different mutations in the GAA gene have been identified in patients with GSDII but the course of the disease is difficult to be predicted on the basis of molecular genetic changes. Studies on large informative families are advisable to better define how genetics and non genetics factors like exercise and diet may influence the clinical phenotype. In this study, we report on clinical, instrumental, and pathological features as well as on molecular analysis of a family with 10 out of 13 siblings affected by late-onset Pompe disease. Three mutations segregated in the family, two of which are novel mutations. Siblings showing a more severe phenotype were compound heterozygous for c.118C > T [p.R40X] and c.2647-7G > A [p.N882fs] on GAA, whereas, two patients showing a mild phenotype were compound heterozygous c.2647-7G > A [p.N882fs] and c.2276G > C [p.G759A] mutations. Quantitative expression analysis showed, in the patients carrying p.R40X/ p.N882fs, a significant (p 0.01) correlation between the levels of expression of the mutated allele and the age at onset of the disease. As far as we know, this is the largest informative family with late-onset Pompe disease described in the literature showing a peculiar complex set of mutations of GAA gene that may partially elucidate the clinical heterogeneity of this family.",1
"Increased occurrence of cleft lip in glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII): exclusion of a contiguous gene syndrome in two patients by presence of intragenic mutations including a novel nonsense mutation Gln58Stop. ||  || Genetic deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase (acid maltase) results in the autosomal recessive disorder glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII) in which intralysosomal accumulation of glycogen primarily affects function of skeletal and cardiac muscle. During an earlier review we noted 3 in 100 cases of GSDII with incidental description of cleft lip. In addition, we identified 2 of 35 GSDII patients referred to us for molecular studies with co-occurence of cleft lip, considerably greater than the estimated frequency of nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate of 1 in 700 to 1,000. Because several lines of evidence support a minor cleft lip/palate (Cl/P) locus on chromosome 17q close to the locus for GSDII, we defined the molecular basis for the GSDII in these two patients to determine if they represented a contiguous gene syndrome. Patient I (of Dutch descent) was homozygous and the parents heterozygous for an intragenic deletion of exon 18 (deltaex18), common in Dutch patients. Patient II was heterozygous for delta525T, a mutation also common in Dutch patients and a novel nonsense mutation (172 [corrected] C-->T; Gln58Stop) in exon 2, the first coding exon. The mother was heterozygous for the delta525T and the father for the 172 [corrected] C-->T; Gln58Stop. The finding that both patients carried intragenic mutations eliminates a contiguous gene syndrome. Whereas the presence of cleft lip/cleft palate in a patient with GSDII could be coincidental, these co-occurences could represent a modifying action of acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency on unlinked or linked genes that result in increased susceptibility for cleft lip.",1
"Exome sequencing of case-unaffected-parents trios reveals recessive and de novo genetic variants in sporadic ALS. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Aged, 80 and over Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Exome Female Genes, Recessive Genetic Variation Genotype High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation || The contribution of genetic variants to sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) remains largely unknown. Either recessive or de novo variants could result in an apparently sporadic occurrence of ALS. In an attempt to find such variants we sequenced the exomes of 44 ALS-unaffected-parents trios. Rare and potentially damaging compound heterozygous variants were found in 27% of ALS patients, homozygous recessive variants in 14% and coding de novo variants in 27%. In 20% of patients more than one of the above variants was present. Genes with recessive variants were enriched in nucleotide binding capacity, ATPase activity, and the dynein heavy chain. Genes with de novo variants were enriched in transcription regulation and cell cycle processes. This trio study indicates that rare private recessive variants could be a mechanism underlying some case of sporadic ALS, and that de novo mutations are also likely to play a part in the disease.",1
"Molecular analysis of phenylketonuria in Denmark: 99% of the mutations detected by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. || Alleles Base Sequence DNA Mutational Analysis Databases, Factual Denmark Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel Gene Frequency Haplotypes Humans Infant, Newborn Molecular Sequence Data Neonatal Screening Nucleic Acid Denaturation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Point Mutation Sequence Deletion || We present the results of a comprehensive study on the molecular basis of phenylketonuria (PKU) in Denmark. A strategy relying on PCR in combination with denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis for analyzing the coding sequence and splice site junctions of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene allowed us to detect a molecular defect on 99% of 308 Danish PKU chromosomes. The mutational spectrum consists of 35 different mutations, including 23 missense mutations, 5 splice mutations, 4 nonsense mutations, and 3 deletions. Seventeen of these mutations have not been reported previously. The mutation detection assay presented in this report offers a simple and reliable methodological entity that can be applied to rapid diagnosis and carrier detection of phenylketonuria in any population, irrespective of the frequency and distribution of mutations.",3 1
"Molecular characterization of phenylketonuria and tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Japan. || Base Sequence Biopterin Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid DNA Primers Genotype Humans Japan Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense Nucleic Acid Amplification Techniques Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Sequence Analysis, DNA || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a heterogeneous metabolic disorder caused by a deficiency in hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). On the basis of phenotype/genotype correlations, determination of phenylketonuric genotype is important for classification of the clinical phenotype and treatment of PKU, including tetrahydrobiopterin therapy. We characterized the genotypes of 203 Japanese patients with PKU and hyperphenylalaninemia using the following systems: (1) denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography with a GC-clamped primer; (2) direct sequencing; and, (3) multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. Of 406 mutant alleles, 390 (96%) were genotyped; 65 mutations were identified, including 22 new mutations. R413P, R241C, IVS4-1g>a, R111X and R243Q were prevalent mutations. Mutations prevalent in the Japanese cohort are also common in Korean and Northern Chinese populations, suggesting same origin. The spectrum of prevalent mutations was not significantly different among six Japanese districts, indicating that Japan comprises a relatively homogeneous ethnic group. We classified the mutations by clinical phenotypes and in vivo PAH activity and estimated the mutations with potential tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) responsiveness. The frequency of BH(4) responsiveness based on the genotype was 29.1% in Japanese PKU patients. A catalog of PKU genotypes would be useful for predicting clinical phenotype, deciding on the subsequent treatment of PKU including BH(4) therapy, and genetic counseling in East Asia.",3 1
"Genetic analysis of 2299delG and C759F mutations (USH2A) in patients with visual and/or auditory impairments. || Alleles DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Extracellular Matrix Proteins Gene Frequency Genotype Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Mutation, Missense Phenotype Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Retinitis Pigmentosa Sequence Deletion Spain || The most common mutation in the USH2A gene (Usherin), 2299delG, causes both typical Usher (USH) syndrome type II and atypical USH syndrome, two autosomal recessive disorders, characterised by moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). Furthermore, the C759F mutation in the USH2A gene has been described in 4.5% of patients with nonsyndromic recessive RP. We have investigated the presence of the 2299delG and/or the C759F mutations in 191 unrelated Spanish patients with different syndromic and nonsyndromic retinal diseases, or with nonsyndromic hearing impairment. The 2299delG mutation was observed in patients with clinical signs of USHII or of atypical USH syndrome, whereas the C759F mutation, regardless of being associated with the 2299delG mutation or not, was identified in cases with nonsyndromic RP, as well as in patients with RP associated with a variability of hearing impairment. The comparative analysis of both phenotypic and genotypic data supports the hypothesis that sensorineural hearing loss in patients with RP may depend on the nature and on the association of the USH2A allele variants present.",1
"A mutation analysis of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene in the Israeli population. || Arabs DNA Mutational Analysis Humans Israel Jews Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase || Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) is a group of diseases characterized by a persistent elevation of phenylalanine levels in tissues and biological fluids. The most frequent form is phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency, causing phenylketonuria (PKU). Among 159 Israeli patients (Jews, Muslim and Christian Arabs and Druze) with HPA, in whom at least one of the mutations was characterized, a total of 43 different mutations were detected, including seven novel ones. PKU was very rare among Ashkenazi Jews and relatively frequent among Jews from Yemen, the Caucasian Mountains, Bukhara and Tunisia. The mutations responsible for the high frequency were: exon3del (Yemenite Jews), L48S (Tunisian Jews) and E178G, P281L and L48S (Jews from the Caucasian Mountains and Bukhara). Among the non-Jewish Israeli citizens, the disease was relatively frequent in the Negev and in the Nazareth vicinity, and in many localities a unique mutation was detected, often in a single family. While marked genetic heterogeneity was observed in the Arab and Jewish populations, only one mutation A300S, was frequent in all of the communities. Several of the other frequent mutations were shared by the non-Ashkenazi Jews and Arabs; none were mutual to Ashkenazi Jews and Arabs.",3 1
"Enlarged vestibular aqueduct: a radiological marker of pendred syndrome, and mutation of the PDS gene. || Adolescent Adult Biomarkers Carrier Proteins Child Child, Preschool Deafness Goiter Humans Infant Membrane Transport Proteins Middle Aged Mutation Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Tomography, X-Ray Computed Vestibular Aqueduct || Although the textbook view of Pendred syndrome is that of an autosomal recessive condition characterized by deafness and goitre, it is increasingly clear that not all such patients present this classical clinical picture. Malformations of the inner ear, specifically enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct, are common in Pendred syndrome and mutations in the PDS (Pendred Syndrome) gene have been recorded in patients presenting with deafness and vestibular aqueduct dilatation only, without other features of Pendred syndrome. Since this is the most common radiological malformation of the cochlea in deaf patients, we investigated what proportion of such cases were due to mutation of the PDS gene. We assessed 57 patients referred with radiological evidence of vestibular aqueduct enlargement, by history, clinical examination, perchlorate discharge test and molecular analysis of the PDS locus. Forty-one patients (72%) had unequivocal evidence of Pendred syndrome. The finding of a single heterozygous mutation at the PDS gene in a further eight was strongly suggestive of a critical role for pendrin, the protein product of the PDS gene, in the generation of enlarged vestibular aqueducts in at least 86% (49/57 cases) of patients with this radiological malformation. Securing the diagnosis of Pendred syndrome may be difficult, especially in the single case. Goitre is an inconstant finding, and the perchlorate discharge test, although helpful, is of diagnostic value only if abnormal. Enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct should be considered as the most likely presentation of Pendred syndrome and should prompt specific investigation of that diagnostic possibility. Pendred syndrome might henceforth be recharacterized as deafness with enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct, which is sometimes associated with goitre.",3 1 4
"RECURRENCE OF POMPE DISEASE IN FIRST COUSINS. || Child, Preschool Family Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant, Newborn Infant, Newborn, Diseases Male || We report on the cases of two first-degree non-consanguineous cousins with infantile-onset Pompe disease, a rare autosomal recessive disease. The first patient developed cardiorespiratory failure at age 1 year. When she was 4 her male cousin developed hypotonia during his first month of life. Both infants had cardiac hypertrophy at diagnosis and shared the c.1927G>A missense mutation. Since a first degree cousin of an affected patient has 50 times the risk of developing the disease compared with unrelated infants and since cardiac hypertrophy is constant in affected infants, the combination of cardiac symptoms with a history of Pompe disease in a first degree cousin leads to a very high probability of having the condition. Clinically oriented screening based on simple diagnostic procedures such as echocardiogram and anamnesis could accelerate the initiation of enzyme replacement therapy of the deficient acid α-glucosidase which is critical to restoring cardiac function in affected infants.",1
"Identification of three novel missense PKU mutations among Chinese. || Alleles Amino Acid Sequence Asian Continental Ancestry Group Base Sequence China Codon DNA Mutational Analysis Humans Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Three novel missense mutations have been identified in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genes of Chinese individuals afflicted with various degrees of phenylketonuria (PKU). A T-to-C transition was observed in exon 5 of the gene, resulting in the substitution of Phe161 by Ser161. Two substitutions, G-to-T and T-to-G, were observed in exon 7, resulting in the substitution of Gly247 by Val247 and Leu255 by Val255, respectively. Expression analysis demonstrated that these mutant proteins produced between 0 and 15% of normal PAH enzyme activity. Population screening of a Chinese sample population indicates that these mutations are quite rare, together accounting for only about 4% of all PKU alleles among the Chinese. The P161S and G247V mutations were each present on a single PAH RFLP haplotype 4 chromosome in patients form Northern China, while the L255V mutation was present on chromosomes of both haplotypes 18 and 21 in patients from Southern China. These results suggest that the remaining 30% of uncharacterized PKU alleles in the Chinese population may bear a large number of relatively rare PAH mutations.",3 1 0
"Life-threatening metabolic alkalosis in Pendred syndrome. ||  || Pendred syndrome, a combination of sensorineural deafness, impaired organification of iodide in the thyroid and goitre, results from biallelic defects in pendrin (encoded by SLC26A4), which transports chloride and iodide in the inner ear and thyroid respectively. Recently, pendrin has also been identified in the kidneys, where it is found in the apical plasma membrane of non-α-type intercalated cells of the cortical collecting duct. Here, it functions as a chloride-bicarbonate exchanger, capable of secreting bicarbonate into the urine. Despite this function, patients with Pendred syndrome have not been reported to develop any significant acid-base disturbances, except a single previous reported case of metabolic alkalosis in the context of Pendred syndrome in a child started on a diuretic. We describe a 46-year-old female with sensorineural deafness and hypothyroidism, who presented with severe hypokalaemic metabolic alkalosis during inter-current illnesses on two occasions, and who was found to be homozygous for a loss-of-function mutation (V138F) in SLC26A4. Her acid-base status and electrolytes were unremarkable when she was well. This case illustrates that, although pendrin is not usually required to maintain acid-base homeostasis under ambient condition, loss of renal bicarbonate excretion by pendrin during a metabolic alkalotic challenge may contribute to life-threatening acid-base disturbances in patients with Pendred syndrome.",1
"Correlation between genotype and phenotype in patients with bi-allelic SLC26A4 mutations. || Deafness Gene Frequency Genotype HEK293 Cells Humans Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Phenotype Republic of Korea Sulfate Transporters Vestibular Aqueduct || Mutation of SLC26A4 is the most common cause of prelingual hearing loss in East Asia. Patients with SLC26A4 mutations have variable phenotypes ranging from non-syndromic hearing loss to Pendred syndrome. Here, we analyzed the correlation between genotype and various inner ear phenotypes and found a possible underlying mechanism. This study included 111 patients with bi-allelic SLC26A4 mutations who had bilateral enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA) and hearing loss. p.H723R (61%), c.919-2A>G (24%), and p.T410M (4%) were the most common mutations in Korean patients with EVAs. Residual hearing in patients with c.919-2A>G or p.T410M mutations was better than that of patients with p.H723R homozygous mutations. Interestingly, quantitative polymerase chain reaction showed normal pendrin transcript (6-17% of normal levels) was produced from patients with c.919-2A>G homozygous mutations. Surface expression ratio of pendrin and residual anion exchange activity were higher in cells transfected with p.T410M in comparison to cells transfected with p.H723R. These results suggest that there is a correlation between degree of residual hearing and the SLC26A4 genotype commonly found in the East Asian population.",1 0
"Letter to the Editors: Concerning ""Divergent clinical outcomes of alphaglucosidase enzyme replacement therapy in two siblings with infantile-onset Pompe disease treated in the symptomatic or pre-symptomatic state"" by Takashi M et al. ||  || ",1 0
"Frequent mutation in Chinese patients with infantile type of GSD II in Taiwan: evidence for a founder effect. ||  || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSD II, Pompe's disease), an autosomal recessive inherited disease, is caused by the deficiency of acid alpha-D-glucosidase, which results in the impaired glycogen degradation in lysosome and causes excess glycogen accumulation in lysosome. In Taiwan, the infantile form of GSD II is the most common type of glycogen storage diseases. The frequency of C1935A mutant allele is 0.8 in these Chinese patients. In this study, we analyzed four single point polymorphic markers (324, 1203, 2065, 2338) by ACRS-based RFLP We observed that the alleles possessing the C1935A mutation in 19 of 25 Chinese patients who were heterozygous or homozygous have conserved polymorphic markers, and all of C1935A mutant alleles in these patients are linked to a specific haplotype. The allele frequency of this specific haplotype in 19 Chinese patients and in 42 normal individuals is 0.95 and 0.17, respectively (P<0.005, chi2 = 66.018). This result suggests that the C1935A mutation in Chinese patients with infantile form of GSD II is due to the founder effect.",1
"Sixty six-month follow-up of muscle power and respiratory function in a case with adult-type Pompe disease treated with enzyme replacement therapy. ||  || We report a patient with adult-type Pompe disease treated with enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) for 5.5 years. We evaluated pulmonary function and muscle strength using 6-minute walk test, manual muscle test, and dynamometer-based measurement. The long-term ERT resulted in a substantial improvement in the pulmonary function and a possible stabilization followed by mild deterioration in muscle power measured by dynamometer and 6-minute walk test. Our data may rationalize the long-term use of ERT for adult-type Pompe disease in terms of maintaining pulmonary function.",1
"Twenty-two novel mutations in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) underscore the genotype-phenotype correlation in glycogen storage disease type II. ||  || Patients with glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII, Pompe disease) suffer from progressive muscle weakness due to acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency. The disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait with a spectrum of clinical phenotypes. We have investigated 29 cases of GSDII and thereby identified 55 pathogenic mutations of the acid alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) encoding acid maltase. There were 34 different mutations identified, 22 of which were novel. All of the missense mutations and two other mutations with an unpredictable effect on acid alpha-glucosidase synthesis and function were transiently expressed in COS cells. The effect of a novel splice-site mutation was investigated by real-time PCR analysis. The outcome of our analysis underscores the notion that the clinical phenotype of GSDII is largely dictated by the nature of the mutations in the GAA alleles. This genotype-phenotype correlation makes DNA analysis a valuable tool to help predict the clinical course of the disease.",2 1 4 0 3
"Quantitative computed tomography for enzyme replacement therapy in Pompe disease. || Child, Preschool Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Liver Muscle, Skeletal Oligosaccharides Tomography, X-Ray Computed alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme, acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA). To the best of our knowledge, no studies have reported the results of systematic and sequential CT analyses before and during ERT. In this study we have treated three patients with late onset Pompe disease by ERT, and investigated the efficacy of treatment by computed tomography number. We measured the serial changes in the computed tomography (CT) number of multiple organs in three patients with late onset of Pompe disease during 24 months of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). Before treatment, the liver and muscle CT numbers were higher in these patients than in the controls. The liver CT number decreased after performing ERT. Furthermore, the urinary glucose tetrasaccharide levels, a biomarker of glycogen accumulation, were elevated before ERT and reduced thereafter. The findings in these cases suggest that the elevation of the liver CT number represents glycogen accumulation in the liver and that the analysis of the liver CT number is therefore a useful tool for assessing the efficacy of ERT.",3 1
"Mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in Iranian patients with phenylketonuria. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disease which results from mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. The aim of this study was the identification of sixteen different mutations in Iranian patients with hyperphenylalaninemia. The mutations were detected during the characterization of PAH genotypes of 39 PKU patients from Qazvin and Zanjan provinces of Iran. PAH mutations have been analyzed by PCR and direct sequencing of PCR products of the promoter region and all 13 exons of PAH gene, including the splicing sites. A mutation detection rate of 74.3 % was realized. Two mutations were found at high frequencies: R176X (10.25 %) and p.P281L (10.25 %). The frequencies of the other mutations were: IVS2+5G>A (2.56 %), IVS2+5G>C (2.56 %), p.L48S (2.56 %), p.R243Q (2.56 %), p.R252Q (5.12 %), p.R261Q (7.69 %), p.R261X (5.12 %), p.E280K (2.56 %), p.I283N (2.56 %), IVS9+5G>A (2.56 %), IVS9+1G>A (1.28 %), IVS11+1G>C (1.28 %), p.C357R (1.28 %), c.632delC (2.56 %). The present results confirm the high heterogeneity of the PAH locus and contribute to information about the distribution and frequency of PKU mutations in the Iranian population.",3 1
"Cognitive functions in patients with phenylketonuria in long-term treatment with tetrahydrobiopterin. || Adolescent Biopterin Child Cognition Compassionate Use Trials Humans Intelligence Phenylketonurias || Cognitive functions were assessed in 9 patients with mild to moderate phenylketonuria (PKU) ranging from 6 to 18 years of age, who were in long-term treatment (>5 years) with 5-9 mg/kg/day tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) on compassionate use, provided by Schircks Inc. An extensive study of cognitive functions (intelligence quotient (IQ), visuospatial, visual memory, fine motor, executive and attentional functions) was conducted, and behavior was assessed using the ADHD Rating Scale and the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function (BRIEF). All patients had normal IQ (M=107, SD=10). The most notable area of impairment was fine motor function, but no significant difference was found between the PKU patients in BH4 treatment who participated in the current study and PKU patients in dietary treatment who participated in a previous study. These results, however, should be interpreted with caution. It is necessary to conduct further studies with a larger number of patients, using more sensitive tests of motor function and using the formulation of BH4 that is currently available.",3 1
"Molecular characterization of phenylketonuria in Japanese patients. || Animals COS Cells Genotype Humans Japan Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Regression Analysis Sequence Analysis, DNA Transfection || We characterized phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotypes of Japanese patients with phenylketonuria (PKU) and hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA). PKU and HPA mutations in 41 Japanese patients were identified by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and direct sequencing, followed by restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis to find a large deletion involving exons 5 and 6. Of 82 mutant alleles, 76 (92%) were genotyped showing 21 mutations. The major mutations were R413P (30.5%), R243Q (7.3%), R241 C (7.3%), IVS4nt-1 (7.3%), T2781 (7.3%), E6nt-96A-->g (6.1%), Y356X (4.9%), R111X (3.7%), and 442-706delE5/6 (2.4%). Eight new mutations (L52 S, delS70, S70P, Y77X, IVS3nt-1, A132 V, W187 C, and C265Y) and a polymorphism of IVS10nt-14 were detected. In vitro PAH activities of mutant PAH cDNA constructs were determined by a COS cell expression system. Six mutations, viz., R408Q, L52 S, R241 C, S70P, V388 M, and R243Q, had 55%, 27%, 25%, 20%, 16% and 10% of the in vitro PAH activity of normal constructs, respectively. The mean pretreatment phenylalanine concentration (0.83+/-0.21 mmol/l) of patients carrying the R408Q, R241 C, or L52 S mutation and a null mutation was significantly lower (P<0.0005) than that (1.99+/-0.65 mmol/l) of patients with both alleles carrying mutations associated with a severe genotype. Simple linear regression analysis showed a correlation between pretreatment phenylalanine concentrations and predicted PAH activity in 29 Japanese PKU patients (y=31.9-1.03x, r=0.59, P<0.0001). Genotype determination is useful in the prediction of biochemical and clinical phenotypes in PKU and can be of particular help in managing patients with this disorder.",3 1 0
Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in a population in Germany: mutational profile and nine novel mutations. ||  || ,3 1
"Microarray-based mutation analysis of 183 Spanish families with Usher syndrome. ||  || The purpose of this study was to test the ability of the genotyping microarray for Usher syndrome (USH) to identify the mutations responsible for the disease in a cohort of 183 patients with USH. DNA from 183 patients with Usher syndrome from the Spanish population was analyzed using a genotyping microarray containing 429 previously identified disease-associated variants in eight USH genes. Mutations detected by the array were confirmed by direct sequencing. Haplotype analysis was also performed in families carrying common Spanish mutations. The genotyping microarray identified 43 different variants, divided into 32 disease causative and 11 probably nonpathologic. Mutations were detected in 62 patients with USH (33.9%). According to the clinical classification of patients, pathologic variants were detected in 31.4% patients with USH1, 39.4% of with USH2, 22.2% with USH3 and 15.8% with unclassified Usher syndrome. Ninety-seven pathologic alleles were detected, corresponding to 26.5% of expected alleles. The USH2A mutations p.C3267R and p.T3571M were revealed as common in the Spanish population, and two major haplotypes linked to these mutations were observed. The genotyping microarray is a robust, low-cost, rapid technique that is effective for the genetic study of patients with USH. However, it also indicates variants of unclear pathologic nature and detection failures have also been observed. Results must be confirmed by direct sequencing to avoid misdiagnosis, and continuous updates of the microarray should be performed to increase the efficiency and rate of detection of mutations.",1
"Skeletal muscle metabolism during prolonged exercise in Pompe disease. || Pompe disease exercise glycogen glycogenosis skeletal muscle metabolism || Pompe disease (glycogenosis type II) is caused by lysosomal alpha-glucosidase deficiency, which leads to a block in intra-lysosomal glycogen breakdown. In spite of enzyme replacement therapy, Pompe disease continues to be a progressive metabolic myopathy. Considering the health benefits of exercise, it is important in Pompe disease to acquire more information about muscle substrate use during exercise. Seven adults with Pompe disease were matched to a healthy control group (1:1). We determined (1) peak oxidative capacity (VO<sub>2peak</sub>) and (2) carbohydrate and fatty acid metabolism during submaximal exercise (33 W) for 1 h, using cycle-ergometer exercise, indirect calorimetry and stable isotopes. In the patients, VO<sub>2peak</sub> was less than half of average control values; mean difference -1659 mL/min (CI: -2450 to -867, <i>P</i> = 0.001). However, the respiratory exchange ratio increased to >1.0 and lactate levels rose 5-fold in the patients, indicating significant glycolytic flux. In line with this, during submaximal exercise, the rates of oxidation (ROX) of carbohydrates and palmitate were similar between patients and controls (mean difference 0.226 g/min (CI: 0.611 to -0.078, <i>P</i> = 0.318) and mean difference 0.016 µmol/kg/min (CI: 1.287 to -1.255, <i>P</i> = 0.710), respectively). Reflecting muscle weakness and wasting, Pompe disease is associated with markedly reduced maximal exercise capacity. However, glycogenolysis is not impaired in exercise. Unlike in other metabolic myopathies, skeletal muscle substrate use during exercise is normal in Pompe disease rendering exercise less complicated for e.g. medical or recreational purposes.",1
"Genetic heterozygosity and pseudodeficiency in the Pompe disease newborn screening pilot program. || False Positive Reactions Feasibility Studies Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Haplotypes Humans Infant, Newborn Mutation Neonatal Screening Pilot Projects alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) caused by deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) activity. This is the first LSD in which newborn screening has been shown to improve clinical outcomes. Newborn screening also identified multiple rare gene variants in this population. Among 132,538 newborns screened, 107 babies (1 in 1239) who had low dried blood spot GAA activity were genotyped. Sixty-nine (64.5%) babies had a total of 54 mutations and 35 novel predictably pathogenic mutations; 36 babies (33.6%) who had no mutation were homozygous for the c.[1726A; 2065A] pseudodeficiency allele. Because 81% of the chromosomes (14% in the controls) were in haplotype *03, we found a link between the pseudodeficiency allele and other mutated alleles. The newborns with Pompe disease detected by screening had lymphocyte GAA activities 0.45 to 1.65 nmol/mg/h (normal 66.7+/-33.8), while only 2 of the 100 false-positive cases had GAA activity less than 2.00 nmol/mg/h (or 3% of the normal mean). Therefore, newborn screening for Pompe disease could be successfully conducted by including genotyping and lymphocyte GAA assay, even in a population with mutation heterozygosity and pseudodeficiency.",3 1 4
"p.D645E of acid α-glucosidase is the most common mutation in thai patients with infantile-onset pompe disease. || Amino Acid Substitution Consanguinity DNA Mutational Analysis Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || to describe genetic features of five unrelated Thai families with infantile-onset Pompe disease caused by mutations in the acid α-glucosidase (GAA) gene. total RNA and genomic DNA were extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes, and mutation analysis of the entire coding regions of the GAA gene was performed in our first patient. Polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis was also used for a particular mutation in subsequent patients. the mutation analysis revealed that all patients harbored the same mutation, c.1935C > A (p.D645E), with three being homozygotes. The p.D645E, therefore, accounted for 80% (8 out of 10 alleles) of the mutations. we identified five unrelated Thai patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease with no history of consanguinity. Finding of the most common mutation, p.D645E, in this study will help facilitate prenatal diagnosis of their family members and molecular diagnosis of future suspected patients. Analysis of common mutations could be the most effective strategy in identifying GAA mutations responsible for Pompe disease in the Thai population.",1
"Algorithm for the early diagnosis and treatment of patients with cross reactive immunologic material-negative classic infantile pompe disease: a step towards improving the efficacy of ERT. || Algorithms Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived Clinical Laboratory Techniques Cross Reactions Early Diagnosis Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunoglobulins Immunosuppression Infant Infant, Newborn Male Methotrexate Rituximab Safety Time Factors Treatment Outcome || Although enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) is a highly effective therapy, CRIM-negative (CN) infantile Pompe disease (IPD) patients typically mount a strong immune response which abrogates the efficacy of ERT, resulting in clinical decline and death. This study was designed to demonstrate that immune tolerance induction (ITI) prevents or diminishes the development of antibody titers, resulting in a better clinical outcome compared to CN IPD patients treated with ERT monotherapy. We evaluated the safety, efficacy and feasibility of a clinical algorithm designed to accurately identify CN IPD patients and minimize delays between CRIM status determination and initiation of an ITI regimen (combination of rituximab, methotrexate and IVIG) concurrent with ERT. Clinical and laboratory data including measures of efficacy analysis for response to ERT were analyzed and compared to CN IPD patients treated with ERT monotherapy. Seven CN IPD patients were identified and started on the ITI regimen concurrent with ERT. Median time from diagnosis of CN status to commencement of ERT and ITI was 0.5 months (range: 0.1-1.6 months). At baseline, all patients had significant cardiomyopathy and all but one required respiratory support. The ITI regimen was safely tolerated in all seven cases. Four patients never seroconverted and remained antibody-free. One patient died from respiratory failure. Two patients required another course of the ITI regimen. In addition to their clinical improvement, the antibody titers observed in these patients were much lower than those seen in ERT monotherapy treated CN patients. The ITI regimen appears safe and efficacious and holds promise in altering the natural history of CN IPD by increasing ERT efficacy. An algorithm such as this substantiates the benefits of accelerated diagnosis and management of CN IPD patients, thus, further supporting the importance of early identification and treatment initiation with newborn screening for IPD.",1
Two mutations affecting the transport and maturation of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase in an adult case of glycogen storage disease type II. ||  || The autosomal recessive glycogen storage disease type II is associated with a deficiency of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (acid maltase). This paper reports on the mutations in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase alleles of an adult patient. A G-1927 to A transition was discovered in exon 14 causing the substitution of Gly-643 by Arg and a second C-2173 to T transition in exon 15 resulting in the substitution of Arg-725 by Trp. Each of the mutations was located in a different allele. The mutations were introduced in the wild-type lysosomal alpha-glucosidase cDNA and expressed in COS cells. Both mutations had a similar effect. The synthesis of the mutant enzyme precursors was not disturbed but the intracellular transport and maturation were impaired. As a result there was an overall deficiency of catalytic activity.,1 0
"Glycogen storage disease type II: identification of four novel missense mutations (D645N, G648S, R672W, R672Q) and two insertions/deletions in the acid alpha-glucosidase locus of patients of differing phenotype. || Adult Child, Preschool Female Fibroblasts Frameshift Mutation Genotype Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Homozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Muscles Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation Phenotype Sequence Analysis, DNA Sequence Deletion alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII), an autosomal recessive myopathic disorder, results from deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase. We searched for mutations in an evolutionarily conserved region in 54 patients of differing phenotype. Four novel mutations (D645N, G448S, R672W, and R672Q) and a previously described mutation (C647W) were identified in five patients and their deleterious effect on enzyme expression demonstrated in vitro. Two novel frame-shifting insertions/deletions (delta nt766-785/insC and +insG@nt2243) were identified in two patients with exon 14 mutations. The remaining three patients were either homozygous for their mutations (D645N/D645 and C647W/C647W) or carried a previously described leaky splice site mutation (IVS1-13T-->G). For all patients ""in vivo"" enzyme activity was consistent with clinical phenotype. Agreement of genotype with phenotype and in vitro versus in vivo enzyme was seen in three patients (two infantile patients carrying C647W/C647W and D645N/+insG@nt2243 and an adult patient heteroallelic for G648S/IVS1-13T-->G). Relative discordance was found in a juvenile patient homozygous for the non-expressing R672Q and an adult patient heterozygous for the minimally expressing R672W and delta nt766-785/+insC. Possible explanations include differences in in vitro assays vs in vivo enzyme activity, tissue specific expression with diminished enzyme expression/stability in fibroblasts vs muscle, somatic mosaicism, and modifying genes.",3 1 4 0
"Molecular epidemiology, genotype-phenotype correlation and BH4 responsiveness in Spanish patients with phenylketonuria. || Alleles Enzyme Replacement Therapy Gene Frequency Genetic Association Studies Genetic Heterogeneity Genotype Humans Molecular Epidemiology Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Spain || Phenylketonuria (PKU), the most common inborn error of amino acid metabolism, is caused by mutations in the phenylalanine-4-hydroxylase (PAH) gene. This study aimed to assess the genotype-phenotype correlation in the PKU Spanish population and the usefulness in establishing genotype-based predictions of BH4 responsiveness in our population. It involved the molecular characterization of 411 Spanish PKU patients: mild hyperphenylalaninemia non-treated (mild HPA-NT) (34%), mild HPA (8.8%), mild-moderate (20.7%) and classic (36.5%) PKU. BH4 responsiveness was evaluated using a 6R-BH4 loading test. We assessed genotype-phenotype associations and genotype-BH4 responsiveness in our population according to literature and classification of the mutations. The mutational spectrum analysis showed 116 distinct mutations, most missense (70.7%) and located in the catalytic domain (62.9%). The most prevalent mutations were c.1066-11G>A (9.7%), p.Val388Met (6.6%) and p.Arg261Gln (6.3%). Three novel mutations (c.61-13del9, p.Ile283Val and p.Gly148Val) were reported. Although good genotype-phenotype correlation was observed, there was no exact correlation for some genotypes. Among the patients monitored for the 6R-BH4 loading test: 102 were responders (87, carried either one or two BH4-responsive alleles) and 194 non-responders (50, had two non-responsive mutations). More discrepancies were observed in non-responders. Our data reveal a great genetic heterogeneity in our population. Genotype is quite a good predictor of phenotype and BH4 responsiveness, which is relevant for patient management, treatment and follow-up.",3 1
Mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in mild hyperphenylalaninemia: a novel mutation in exon 3. ||  || ,3 1
"Effect of enzyme replacement therapy in late onset Pompe disease: open pilot study of 48 weeks follow-up. || Adult Blood Glucose Child Creatine Kinase Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Follow-Up Studies Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Motor Activity Pilot Projects Retrospective Studies || Late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by deficiency of the enzyme acid glucosidase alfa (GAA). Recently, enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) using recombinant human GAA (rhGAA) became clinically available, and is expected to modify the clinical course in LOPD of various stages. In this study, we evaluated the efficacy and adverse events of ERT for 48 weeks in Korean LOPD patients. Five Korean LOPD patients were included in the study. At baseline, clinical and laboratory features, including muscular and pulmonary function, were assessed, and rhGAA was infused every 2 weeks. Then, patients were examined at every 12-week interval for evaluation of changes in motor and pulmonary function for 48 weeks along with adverse reactions to ERT. The muscular and pulmonary function of the patients varied depending on the baseline condition of the patient after 48 weeks of ERT. However, the overall function of the patients showed stabilization of the disease rather than the improvement seen in infantile-onset Pompe disease. This is the first clinical study on ERT of Korean LOPD patients. Results of our study showed stabilization of muscular and pulmonary function in LOPD patients for 48 weeks with a favorable prognosis for patients who received early diagnosis and ambulatory patients. One of our patients developed a serious anaphylactic reaction, which necessitated the cessation of further ERT. Therefore, our study shows that early diagnosis and ERT are important in preventing further deterioration of the disease.",1
"Whole-exome sequencing identifies USH2A mutations in a pseudo-dominant Usher syndrome family. || Exome Extracellular Matrix Proteins Family Female Genome-Wide Association Study High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Mutation Pedigree Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome (USH) is an autosomal recessive (AR) multi-sensory degenerative disorder leading to deaf-blindness. USH is clinically subdivided into three subclasses, and 10 genes have been identified thus far. Clinical and genetic heterogeneities in USH make a precise diagnosis difficult. A dominant‑like USH family in successive generations was identified, and the present study aimed to determine the genetic predisposition of this family. Whole‑exome sequencing was performed in two affected patients and an unaffected relative. Systematic data were analyzed by bioinformatic analysis to remove the candidate mutations via step‑wise filtering. Direct Sanger sequencing and co‑segregation analysis were performed in the pedigree. One novel and two known mutations in the USH2A gene were identified, and were further confirmed by direct sequencing and co‑segregation analysis. The affected mother carried compound mutations in the USH2A gene, while the unaffected father carried a heterozygous mutation. The present study demonstrates that whole‑exome sequencing is a robust approach for the molecular diagnosis of disorders with high levels of genetic heterogeneity.",2 1
"A low prevalence of MYH7/MYBPC3 mutations among familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients in India. || Adult Aged Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Binding Sites Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Carrier Proteins Child, Preschool Conserved Sequence Female Genetic Association Studies Humans India Male Middle Aged Models, Molecular Mutation, Missense Myosin Heavy Chains Peptidyl-Dipeptidase A Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Protein Structure, Tertiary Sequence Analysis, DNA Young Adult || Familial Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (FHC) is an autosomal dominant disorder affecting the cardiac muscle and exhibits varied clinical symptoms because of genetic heterogeneity. Several disease causing genes have been identified and most code for sarcomere proteins. In the current study, we have carried out clinical and molecular analysis of FHC patients from India. FHC was detected using echocardiography and by analysis of clinical symptoms and family history. Disease causing mutations in the β-cardiac myosin heavy chain (MYH7) and Myosin binding protein C3 (MYBPC3) genes were identified using Polymerase Chain Reaction-Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid (PCR-DNA) sequencing. Of the 55 patient samples screened, mutations were detected in only nineteen in the two genes; MYBPC3 mutations were identified in 12 patients while MYH7 mutations were identified in five, two patients exhibited double heterozygosity. All four MYH7 mutations were missense mutations, whereas only 3/9 MYPBC3 mutations were missense mutations. Four novel mutations in MYBPC3 viz. c.456delC, c.2128G>A (p.E710K), c.3641G>A (p.W1214X), and c.3656T>C (p.L1219P) and one in MYH7 viz. c.965C>T (p.S322F) were identified. A majority of missense mutations affected conserved amino acid residues and were predicted to alter the structure of the corresponding mutant proteins. The study has revealed a greater frequency of occurrence of MYBPC3 mutations when compared to MYH7 mutations.",1
"Mutational spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Sicily: implications for diagnosis of hyperphenylalaninemia in southern Europe. || Alleles Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Base Sequence DNA Mutational Analysis Europe Genotype Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Sicily || Hyperphenylalaninemia due to a deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) is the most common inborn error of amino acid metabolism. Clinically, the disorder is highly heterogeneous, spanning from nonphenylketonuria hyperphenylalaninemia to classical phenylketonuria. Only little is known about the molecular defects underlying hyperphenylalaninemia in Southern Europe. In this study, we conducted a systematic analysis of 53 patients from the Sicilian population. Each patient included in the study had persistently elevated blood levels of phenylalanine and met the differential criteria for PAH deficiency. Genomic DNA was analysed by scanning all PAH-coding exons for mutations by PCR in combination with denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). 52 patients were completely genotyped. A spectrum of 40 different mutations was established including 17 novel PAH mutations. Our results explain the clinical heterogeneity of hyperphenylalaninemia in Southern Europe, and form the basis for the establishment of phenotype-genotype correlations in Sicily and surrounding countries.",3 1
"Long-term follow-up results in enzyme replacement therapy for Pompe disease: a case report. ||  || Pompe disease (PD) is a metabolic myopathy caused by a deficiency of acid-alpha glucosidase (GAA), a lysosomal enzyme that cleaves glycogen. The classic infantile-onset form is characterised by severe hypotonia and cardiomyopathy. Untreated patients usually die within the first year of life due to cardiorespiratory failure. Several studies involving patients with infantile-onset PD have shown that enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with alglucosidase alfa, recombinant human GAA (rhGAA), significantly prolongs survival, decreases cardiomegaly, and improves cardiac function and conduction abnormalities. However, the efficacy on motor, cognitive and social milestones appears to be more related to the condition of the patient before the start of treatment. To date, the sample of early diagnosed and treated patients is small and the length of follow-up is still limited. We report the results of a long-term follow-up of one patient presenting severe bradycardia and cardiomyopathy at birth, diagnosed in the third day of life and successfully treated by ERT. Serum muscle enzymes at diagnosis were AST 200 U/L, ALT 99 U/L and CPK 731 U/L (n.v. 0-295); the molecular study identified the homozygous missense mutation c.1933 G> A p.Asp645Asn (GAA exon 14). Left Ventricular Mass Index (LVMI) at baseline was 171 g/m(2) (Z-score = 4.3) and decreased to normal values since the 3-month follow-up. A muscle biopsy performed at 18 months after the start of therapy, showed only a low degree of muscle involvement. To our knowledge, this is the longest ERT treatment follow-up in a symptomatic neonatal patient with Pompe disease.",3 1
The African origin of the common mutation in African American patients with glycogen-storage disease type II. || Africa African Continental Ancestry Group Glycogen Storage Disease Humans Mutation || ,1
"Molecular genetics and impact of residual in vitro phenylalanine hydroxylase activity on tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness in Turkish PKU population. || Alleles Biopterin Dose-Response Relationship, Drug Female Genetic Association Studies Genetic Variation Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Male Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Turkey || The prevalence of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH)-deficient phenylketonuria (PKU) in Turkey is high (1 in 6500 births), but data concerning the genotype distribution and impact of the genotype on tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) therapy are scarce. To characterize the phenotypic and genotypic variability in the Turkish PKU population and to correlate it with physiological response to BH(4) challenge. We genotyped 588 hyperphenylalaninemic patients and performed a BH(4) loading test (20mg/kg bw) in 462 patients. Residual PAH activity of mutant proteins was calculated from available in vitro expression data. Data were tabulated in the BIOPKU database (www.biopku.org). Eighty-eight mutations were observed, the most common missense mutations being the splice variant c.1066-11G>A (24.6%). Twenty novel mutations were detected (11 missense, 4 splice-site, and 5 deletion/insertions). Two mutations were observed in 540/588 patients (91.8%) but in 9 patients atypical genotypes with >2 mutations were found (8 with p.R155H in cis with another variant) and in 19 patients mutations were found in BH(4)-metabolizing genes. The most common genotype was c.1066-11G>A/c.1066-11G>A (15.5%). Approximately 22% of patients responded to BH(4) challenge. A substantial in vitro residual activity (average >25% of the wild-type enzyme) was associated with response to BH(4). In homozygous genotypes (n=206), both severity of the phenotype (r=0.83) and residual PAH activity (r=0.85) correlate with BH(4) responsiveness. Together with the BH(4) challenge, these data enable the genotype-based classification of BH(4) responsiveness and document importance of residual PAH activity. This first report of a large-scale genotype assessment in a population of Turkish PKU patients also documents a high prevalence (47%) of the severe classic phenotype.",3 1 0
"Phenylketonuria and hyperphenylalaninemia in eastern Germany: a characteristic molecular profile and 15 novel mutations. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an important error of amino acid metabolism which results in most patients from phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency. PKU displays a marked genotypic heterogeneity both within and between different populations. The aim of this study was to establish the genotypic spectrum of PKU in eastern Germany, and to compare this to the distribution of mutations in western Germany. The study population included 302 patients in 290 families who were followed at treatment centers in Berlin, Leipzig and Jena. The study showed marked genotypic variability with a total of 75 mutations, including 15 that have so far not been described (eleven missense mutations, one splicing mutation, and three small deletions). One of these novel mutations, E183Q, occurred in cis to a R408W mutation. In the non-immigrant eastern German population, the frequency of R408W accounted for 40.1% of the PKU alleles. In the immigrant Turkish population of the former West Berlin, the most prevalent mutation was IVS10-11G>A (57%). There was a marked difference of the genotypic spectrum between the population studied here and the data reported from the western part of the country.",3 1
"Digenic inheritance of deafness caused by mutations in genes encoding cadherin 23 and protocadherin 15 in mice and humans. || Aging Animals Base Sequence Cadherins Deafness Hair Cells, Auditory Humans Mice Mice, Mutant Strains Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Protein Precursors Quantitative Trait Loci Spiral Ganglion || Mutations in genes coding for cadherin 23 and protocadherin 15 cause deafness in both mice and humans. Here, we provide evidence that mutations at these two cadherin loci can interact to cause hearing loss in digenic heterozygotes of both species. Using a classical genetic approach, we generated mice that were heterozygous for both Cdh23 and Pcdh15 mutations on a uniform C57BL/6J background. Significant levels of hearing loss were detected in these mice when compared to age-matched single heterozygous animals or normal controls. Cytoarchitectural defects in the cochlea of digenic heterozygotes, including degeneration of the stereocilia and a base-apex loss of hair cells and spiral ganglion cells, were consistent with the observed age-related hearing loss of these mice beginning with the high frequencies. In humans, we also have obtained evidence for a digenic inheritance of a USH1 phenotype in three unrelated families with mutations in CDH23 and PCDH15. Altogether, our data indicate that CDH23 and PCDH15 play an essential long-term role in maintaining the normal organization of the stereocilia bundle.",1
"Remarkably low fibroblast acid α-glucosidase activity in three adults with Pompe disease. || Adult Alleles Fibroblasts Genetic Association Studies Genotype Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Heterozygote Humans Infant, Newborn Male Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal Mutation Phenotype alpha-Glucosidases || Most adults with Pompe disease are compound heterozygotes in which one acid α-glucosidase (GAA) allele harbors the c.-32-13T>G mutation, causing partial loss of GAA, and the other allele harbors a fully deleterious mutation. The fibroblast GAA activity in these patients is usually between 5% and 25% of the average in healthy individuals. In some adult patients, however, the fibroblast GAA activity is much lower and is in the range that is normally observed in classic-infantile Pompe disease. We investigated the genotype-phenotype correlation in three such adult patients and measured the GAA activity as well as the glycogen content in muscle and fibroblasts in order to better understand the clinical course. DNA was sequenced and GAA activity and glycogen content were measured in leukocytes, fibroblasts and muscle. Muscle biopsies were microscopically analyzed and the biosynthesis of GAA in fibroblasts was analyzed by immunoblotting. GAA activity and glycogen content in fibroblasts and muscle tissue in healthy controls, adult patients with Pompe disease and classic-infantile patients were compared with those of the three index patients. One patient had genotype c.525delT/c.671G>A (r.0/p.Arg224Gln). Two affected brothers had genotype c.569G>A/c.1447G>A (p.Arg190His/p.Gly483Arg). In all three cases the GAA activity and the glycogen content in fibroblasts were within the same range as in classic-infantile Pompe disease, but the activity and glycogen content in muscle were both within the adult range. In fibroblasts, the first step of GAA synthesis appeared unaffected but lysosomal forms of GAA were not detectable with immunoblotting. Some adult patients with mutations other than c.-32-13T>G can have very low GAA activity in fibroblasts but express higher activity in muscle and store less glycogen in muscle than patients with classic-infantile Pompe disease. This might explain why these patients have a slowly progressive course of Pompe disease.",3 1 0
Phenylalanine hydroxylase gene: a novel splice mutation in intron 2 in two German and Polish families with severe phenylketonuria. ||  || ,2 1 3
"Identification of eight novel mutations of the acid alpha-glucosidase gene causing the infantile or juvenile form of glycogen storage disease type II. || Adult Asian Continental Ancestry Group DNA Mutational Analysis Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic Genetic Markers Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Homozygote Humans Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Taiwan alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen-storage disease type II (GSDII; OMIM #232300), an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a deficiency of the glycogen hydrolysis enzyme acid alpha-glucosidase (acid GAA; acid maltase, EC. 3.2.10.20), results in the accumulation of glycogen in the lysosome. We performed a molecular genetic study on 29 patients with infantile-onset glycogen-storage disease type II (GSDII), 6 with juvenile-onset GSDII and one carrier for GSDII. Seventeen different mutations were identified among them; 8 were novel mutations: c.421C > A (p.L141M), c.872T > C (p.L291P), c.893A > C (p.Y298S), c.1375G > A (p.D459N), c.1437G > C (p.K479N), c.1509_1511del (p.A504del), c.1960T > C (p.S654P), and c.2174G > C (p.R725P). One of the mutations identified, c.2238G > C (p.W746C), which was a sequence change of unknown pathogenic significance causing diminished enzyme activity,was found homozygously in a juvenile-onset patient. We also found a juvenile-onset patient with homozygote c.1935C > A mutation which was frequently found in infantile-onset patients. In addition to mutations, we also identified 14 new polymorphisms in the acid alpha-glucosidase gene. The genotype/phenotype correlations indicated that c.2238G > C (p.W746C) is correlated with juvenile- onset GSDII and that c.872T > C (p.L291P) and c.1411_1414del (p.E471fsX5) are correlated with infantile-onset GSDII. Mutational analysis of GAA is useful in genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis of the disease.",3 1
"Identification of GAA variants through whole exome sequencing targeted to a cohort of 606 patients with unexplained limb-girdle muscle weakness. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Female Genetic Variation Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Middle Aged Muscle Weakness Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle Whole Exome Sequencing Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || Late-onset Pompe disease is a rare genetic neuromuscular disorder caused by a primary deficiency of α-glucosidase and the associated accumulation of glycogen in lysosomal vacuoles. The deficiency of α-glucosidase can often be detected using an inexpensive and readily accessible dried blood spot test when Pompe disease is suspected. Like several neuromuscular disorders, Pompe disease typically presents with progressive weakness of limb-girdle muscles and respiratory insufficiency. Due to the phenotypic heterogeneity of these disorders, however, it is often difficult for clinicians to reach a diagnosis for patients with Pompe disease. Six hundred and six patients from a European population were recruited onto our study. Inclusion criteria stipulated that index cases must present with limb-girdle weakness or elevated serum creatine kinase activity. Whole exome sequencing with at least 250 ng DNA was completed using an Illumina exome capture and a 38 Mb baited target. A panel of 169 candidate genes for limb-girdle weakness was analysed for disease-causing variants. A total of 35 variants within GAA were detected. Ten distinct variants in eight unrelated index cases (and four siblings not sequenced in our study) were considered disease-causing, with the patients presenting with heterogeneous phenotypes. The eight unrelated individuals were compound heterozygotes for two variants. Six patients carried the intronic splice site c.-13 T > G transversion and two of the six patients also carried the exonic p.Glu176ArgfsTer45 frameshift. Four of the ten variants were novel in their association with Pompe disease. Here, we highlight the advantage of using whole exome sequencing as a tool for detecting, diagnosing and treating patients with rare, clinically variable genetic disorders.",1
"Pompe disease in a Brazilian series: clinical and molecular analyses with identification of nine new mutations. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Brazil Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II or acid maltase deficiency) is an inherited autosomal recessive deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA), with predominant manifestations of skeletal muscle weakness. A broad range of studies have been published focusing on Pompe patients from different countries, but none from Brazil. We investigated 41 patients with either infantile-onset (21 cases) or late-onset (20 cases) disease by muscle pathology, enzyme activity and GAA gene mutation screening. Molecular analyses identified 71 mutant alleles from the probands, nine of which are novel (five missense mutations c.136T > G, c.650C > T, c.1456G > C, c.1834C > T, and c.1905C > A, a splice-site mutation c.1195-2A > G, two deletions c.18_25del and c.2185delC, and one nonsense mutation c.643G > T). Interestingly, the c.1905C > A variant was detected in four unrelated patients and may represent a common Brazilian Pompe mutation. The c.2560C > T severe mutation was frequent in our population suggesting a high prevalence in Brazil. Also, eight out of the 21 infantile-onset patients have two truncating mutations predicted to abrogate protein expression. Of the ten late-onset patients who do not carry the common late-onset intronic mutation c.-32-13T > G, five (from three separate families) carry the recently described intronic mutation, c.-32-3C > A, and one sibpair carries the novel missense mutation c.1781G > C in combination with known severe mutation c.1941C > G. The association of these variants (c.1781G > C and c.-32-3C > A) with late-onset disease suggests that they allow for some residual activity in these patients. Our findings help to characterize Pompe disease in Brazil and support the need for additional studies to define the wide clinical and pathological spectrum observed in this disease.",1 4
"Mutation spectrum of phenylketonuria in Syrian population: genotype-phenotype correlation. || Base Sequence Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Frameshift Mutation Genetic Association Studies Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Infant Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length RNA Splice Sites Syria || Characterization of the molecular basis of phenylketonuria (PKU) in Syria has been accomplished through the analysis of 78 unrelated chromosomes from 39 Syrian patients with PKU. Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene mutations have been analyzed by using molecular detection methods based on the restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), artificial constructed restriction sites (ACRS) PCR and direct DNA sequencing. 56.4% of the patients had cPKU. A mutation detection rate of 79.49% was achieved and sixteen different mutations were found: missense 56.25%, splice site 37.5%, and frameshift 6.25%. The predominant mutation in this population sample was p.R261Q G>A, p.F55>Lfs and p.R243Q G>A. No mutation in six PKU patients was observed. In 57.9% of patient genotypes, the metabolic phenotype could be predicted. The identification of the mutations in the PAH gene and the genotype-phenotype correlation should facilitate the evaluation of metabolic phenotypes, diagnosis, implementation of optimal dietary therapy, and determination of prognosis in the patients and genetic counseling for the patient's relatives.",3 1
"Unravelling the pathogenic role and genotype-phenotype correlation of the USH2A p.(Cys759Phe) variant among Spanish families. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Amino Acid Substitution Blindness Extracellular Matrix Proteins Genetic Association Studies Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Kaplan-Meier Estimate Middle Aged Retinitis Pigmentosa Spain Usher Syndromes || Mutations in USH2A cause both isolated Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) and Usher syndrome (that implies RP and hearing impairment). One of the most frequent variants identified in this gene and among these patients is the p.(Cys759Phe) change. However, the pathogenic role of this allele has been questioned since it was found in homozygosity in two healthy siblings of a Spanish family. To assess the causative role of USH2A p.(Cys759Phe) in autosomal recessive RP (ARRP) and Usher syndrome type II (USH2) and to establish possible genotype-phenotype correlations associated with p.(Cys759Phe), we performed a comprehensive genetic and clinical study in patients suffering from any of the two above-mentioned diseases and carrying at least one p.(Cys759Phe) allele. Diagnosis was set according to previously reported protocols. Genetic analyses were performed by using classical molecular and Next-Generation Sequencing approaches. Probands of 57 unrelated families were molecularly studied and 63 patients belonging to these families were phenotypically evaluated. Molecular analysis characterized 100% of the cases, identifying: 11 homozygous patients for USH2A p.(Cys759Phe), 42 compound heterozygous patients (12 of them with another missense USH2A pathogenic variant and 30 with a truncating USH2A variant), and 4 patients carrying the p.(Cys759Phe) allele and a pathogenic variant in another RP gene (PROM1, CNGB1 or RP1). No additional causative variants were identified in symptomatic homozygous patients. Statistical analysis of clinical differences between zygosity states yielded differences (p≤0.05) in age at diagnosis of RP and hypoacusis, and progression of visual field loss. Homozygosity of p.(Cys759Phe) and compound heterozygosity with another USH2A missense variant is associated with ARRP or ARRP plus late onset hypoacusis (OR = 20.62, CI = 95%, p = 0.041). The present study supports the role of USH2A p.(Cys759Phe) in ARRP and USH2 pathogenesis, and demonstrates the clinical differences between different zygosity states. Phenotype-genotype correlations may guide the genetic characterization based upon specific clinical signs and may advise on the clinical management and prognosis based upon a specific genotype.",2 1 4
"Frequent mutations in Japanese patients with acid maltase deficiency. || Adolescent Adult Alleles DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Testing Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Japan Mutation || We screened 22 Japanese patients with acid maltase deficiency (seven with the infantile type, eight with the juvenile type and seven with the adult type) for three previously described mutations, D645E, S529V and R672Q, and a novel mutation, R600C. Although D645E has been reported to be common in Chinese patients with the infantile type, only three of 44 alleles (two of 14 infantile type alleles) from Japanese patients harbored the D645E mutation. The S529V mutation was identified in six of 14 alleles from adult-onset patients. None of the infantile or juvenile patients harbored the S529V mutation. Therefore, S529V apparently results in the adult type disease and is common in Japanese adult-onset patients. R672Q was identified in two pairs of siblings with the juvenile type. A novel mutation, R600C, was identified in eight of 22 patients (nine of 44 alleles). Therefore, R600C is another common Japanese mutation occurring at a CpG dinucleotide ""hot spot"". Homozygosity for this mutation apparently results in the infantile phenotype. Genetic diagnosis by detecting these four mutations might be feasible for most Japanese patients with acid maltase deficiency.",3 1
"Adult-onset glycogen storage disease type II: phenotypic and allelic heterogeneity in German patients. || Adult Age of Onset Alleles Alternative Splicing Amino Acid Sequence Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Heterogeneity Germany Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Introns Lysosomes Middle Aged Mutagenesis, Insertional Phenotype Point Mutation Sequence Deletion Sequence Homology, Amino Acid Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII, Pompe's disease) is an autosomal recessive inherited deficiency of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (GAA). Clinical as well as biochemical and allelic heterogeneity have been described in GSDII. We identified mutations within the GAA gene in seven unrelated German patients, six with adult- and one with juvenile-onset GSDII. Beside previously described mutations [IVS1 (-13T --> G), delta(exon) 18, C1634T], we characterized four new mutations of GSDII: IVS6 (-22T --> G), 271delG, G1912T (Gly638Trp), and 2432insC. The IVS6 (-22T --> G) mutation gives rise to aberrant splicing, causing inframe deletions of 25 or 40 amino acids within the GAA coding sequence and the insertion of a sequence of seven missense amino acids. Two affected siblings and an unrelated patient with adult GSDII are apparently homozygous for the exon 18 deletion. Both siblings are also heteroallelic for IVS1 (-13T --> G). In conclusion, we observed pronounced allelic heterogeneity and an unexpectedly high frequency of homozygosity for larger in-frame deletions within the GAA coding sequence in German adult-onset GSDII patients.",3 1 0
"Close monitoring of initial enzyme replacement therapy in a patient with childhood-onset Pompe disease. || Child Creatine Kinase Enzyme Replacement Therapy Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Longitudinal Studies Male Monitoring, Physiologic Treatment Outcome Walking || Pompe disease is classified into infantile and late-onset (childhood and adult) forms based on onset age and degree of organ involvement. While benefits of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) for the infantile form have been confirmed, efficacy for late-onset forms reportedly varies. We report close monitoring of initial ERT, focusing especially on the first year, in a 12-year-old boy with childhood-onset Pompe disease. At age 10, he started ERT at 20 mg/kg every other week. Respiratory and motor functions were evaluated at each infusion, and by skeletal muscle computed tomography (CT) and cardiac echography every 4 months. He gained the ability to climb stairs without a rail and % vital capacity improved just 1.5 months after starting ERT. Grip power, manual muscle testing (MMT) and the timed and 6-min walking distance tests (6MWT) improved promptly, paralleling improvements in clinical symptoms. However, this steady improvement stopped around 8 months, with deterioration to the initial level by about 24 months. Antibody against recombinant human alpha-glucosidase was very low at 15 months; therefore, the lack of treatment response did not completely correspond to antibody production. On the other hand, cardiac wall thickening worsened after 4 months, then improved to better than baseline after 8 months, and this improvement was well maintained. Among our set parameters, the timed test results corresponded better to his changing clinical course than did grip power, MMT or 6-min walking test results.",1
"Combined genetic approaches yield a 48% diagnostic rate in a large cohort of French hearing-impaired patients. ||  || Hearing loss is the most common sensory disorder and because of its high genetic heterogeneity, implementation of Massively Parallel Sequencing (MPS) in diagnostic laboratories is greatly improving the possibilities of offering optimal care to patients. We present the results of a two-year period of molecular diagnosis that included 207 French families referred for non-syndromic hearing loss. Our multi-step strategy involved (i) DFNB1 locus analysis, (ii) MPS of 74 genes, and (iii) additional approaches including Copy Number Variations, in silico analyses, minigene studies coupled when appropriate with complete gene sequencing, and a specific assay for STRC. This comprehensive screening yielded an overall diagnostic rate of 48%, equally distributed between DFNB1 (24%) and the other genes (24%). Pathogenic genotypes were identified in 19 different genes, with a high prevalence of GJB2, STRC, MYO15A, OTOF, TMC1, MYO7A and USH2A. Involvement of an Usher gene was reported in 16% of the genotyped cohort. Four de novo variants were identified. This study highlights the need to develop several molecular approaches for efficient molecular diagnosis of hearing loss, as this is crucial for genetic counselling, audiological rehabilitation and the detection of syndromic forms.",1
"The phenotype, genotype, and outcome of infantile-onset Pompe disease in 18 Saudi patients. ||  || Infantile-Onset Pompe Disease (IOPD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of glycogen metabolism resulting from deficiency of the lysosomal hydrolase acid α-glucosidase encoded by GAA gene. Affected infants present before the age of 12 months with hypotonia, muscle weakness, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has been shown to improve survival, cardiac mass, and motor skills. In this work, we aim to illustrate the genotypes of IOPD and the outcome of ERT in our population. The medical records of infants with confirmed diagnosis of IOPD who received ERT were reviewed. Eighteen infants (7 males, 11 females) were included in the study. The median age at presentation was 2 months and the median age at the start of ERT was 4.5 months. Fifteen (83.3%) infants died with a median age at death of 12 months. The 3 alive infants (whose current ages are 6½ years, 6 years, and 10 years), who were initiated on ERT at the age of 3 weeks, 5 months, and 8 months respectively, has had variable response with requirement of assisted ventilation in one child and tracheostomy in another child. All infants were homozygous forGAA mutations except one infant who was compound heterozygous. All infants (n = 8) with truncating mutations died. Our work provides insight into the correlation of genotypes and outcome of ERT in IOPD in Saudi Arabia. Our data suggest that early detection of cases, through newborn screening, and immunomodulation before the initiation of ERT may improve the outcome of ERT in Saudi infants with IOPD.",1
"Alkaptonuria and Pompe disease in one patient: metabolic and molecular analysis. || Alkaptonuria Child Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Pedigree || Pompe disease is characterised by deficiency of acid α-glucosidase that results in abnormal glycogen deposition in the muscles. Alkaptonuria is caused by a defect in the enzyme homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase with subsequent accumulation of homogentisic acid. We report the case of a 6-year-old boy diagnosed with Pompe disease and alkaptonuria. Urine organic acids and α-glucosidase were measured. Homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase (HGO) and acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) genes were sequenced by Sanger DNA sequencing. The level of α-glucosidase in white blood cells was markedly decreased (4 nm/mg) while the level of homogentisic acid was markedly increased (15 027 mmol/mol creatine). GAA sequencing detected two heterozygous GAA mutations (C.670C>T and C.1064T>C) while HGO sequencing revealed three polymorphisms in exons 4, 5 and 6, respectively. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported instance of Pompe disease and alkaptonuria occurring in the same individual.",1
"Mutation analysis of PAH gene and characterization of a recurrent deletion mutation in Korean patients with phenylketonuria. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Binding Sites DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Humans Korea Models, Molecular Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Protein Structure, Tertiary Sequence Deletion || Phenylketonuria (PKU; MIM 261600) is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder caused by a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH; EC 1.14.16.1). Point mutations in the PAH gene are known to cause PKU in various ethnic groups, and large deletions or duplications account for up to 3% of the PAH mutations in some ethnic groups. However, a previous study could not identify approximately 14% of the mutant alleles by sequence analysis in Korean patients with PKU, which suggests that large deletions or duplication might be frequent causes of PKU in Koreans. To test this hypothesis, we performed multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) for the identification of uncharacterized mutant alleles after PAH sequence analysis of 33 unrelated Korean patients with PKU. Bi-directional sequencing of the PAH exons and flanking intronic regions revealed 27 different mutations, including four novel mutations (two missense and two deletion mutations), comprising 57/66 (86%) mutant alleles. MLPA identified a large deletion that encompassed exons 5 and 6 in four patients, another large deletion that extended from exon 4 to exon 7 in one patient, and a duplication of exon 4 in one patient. Chromosomal walking characterized the deletion breakpoint of the most common large deletion that involved exons 5 and 6 (c.456_706+138del). The present study shows that the allelic frequency of exon deletion or duplication is 9% (6/66) in Korean PKU patients, which suggests that these mutations may be frequent causes of PKU in Korean subjects.",3 1
"Connexin26 mutations associated with the most common form of non-syndromic neurosensory autosomal recessive deafness (DFNB1) in Mediterraneans. || Connexin 26 Connexins DNA Primers Deafness Genetic Markers Hearing Loss, Conductive Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Mediterranean Region Microsatellite Repeats Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Sequence Analysis, DNA || Non-syndromic neurosensory autosomal recessive deafness (NSRD) is the most common form of genetic hearing loss. Previous studies defined at least 15 human NSRD loci. Recently we demonstrated that DFNB1, located on the long arm of chromosome 13, accounts for approximately 80% of cases in the Mediterranean area. Further analysis with additional markers now identifies several recombinants which narrow the candidate region to approximately 5 cM, encompassed by markers D13S141 and D13S232 and including several ESTs and candidate genes, including the connexin26 (GJB2) gene. Analysis of PCR products from our affected patients' DNA shows two frameshift mutations in the connexin26 gene. Deletion of a G within a stretch of six Gs at position 35 of the GJB2 cDNA (mutation 35delG) leads to premature chain termination and is present in 63% of NSRD chromosomes, demonstrating linkage to chromosome 13. Deletion of a T at position 167 of GJB2 (mutation 167delT), also resulting in premature chain termination, was detected in another patient. Four neutral sequence polymorphisms were also identified. These findings are in agreement with a recent study showing that mutations in the connexin26 gene are associated with genetic forms of deafness in three Pakistani families and that GJB2 is DFNB1. Connexin26 is a member of a large family of proteins involved in formation of gap junctions, which are involved in electrical synapses and the direct transfer of small molecules and ionic currents between neighboring cells. The identification of GJB2 as the DFNB1 gene should provide a better understanding of the biology of normal and abnormal hearing, help form the basis for diagnosis and may facilitate development of strategies for treatment of this common genetic disorder.",1
"Recurrent mutation, gene conversion, or recombination at the human phenylalanine hydroxylase locus: evidence in French-Canadians and a catalog of mutations. ||  || The codon 408 mutation (CGG----TGG, Arg----Trp) in exon 12 of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene occurs on haplotype 1 in French-Canadians; elsewhere this mutation (R408W) occurs on haplotype 2. A CpG dinucleotide is involved. The finding is compatible with a recurrent mutation, gene conversion, or a single recombination between haplotypes 2 and 1. A tabulation of 20 known mutations at the PAH locus reveals three instances of putative recurrent mutation.",1
Five novel missense mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in phenylketonuria. ||  || ,3 1
"KCNJ10 may not be a contributor to nonsyndromic enlargement of vestibular aqueduct (NSEVA) in Chinese subjects. || Case-Control Studies China Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Sulfate Transporters Vestibular Aqueduct || Nonsyndromic enlargement of vestibular aqueduct (NSEVA) is an autosomal recessive hearing loss disorder that is associated with mutations in SLC26A4. However, not all patients with NSEVA carry biallelic mutations in SLC26A4. A recent study proposed that single mutations in both SLC26A4 and KCNJ10 lead to digenic NSEVA. We examined whether KCNJ10 excert a role in the pathogenesis of NSEVA in Chinese patients. SLC26A4 was sequenced in 1056 Chinese patients with NSEVA. KCNJ10 was screened in 131 patients who lacked mutations in either one or both alleles of SLC26A4. Additionally, KCNJ10 was screened in 840 controls, including 563 patients diagnosed with NSEVA who carried biallelic SLC26A4 mutations, 48 patients with nonsyndromic hearing loss due to inner ear malformations that did not involve enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct (EVA), 96 patients with conductive hearing loss due to various causes, and 133 normal-hearing individuals with no family history of hereditary hearing loss. 925 NSEVA patients were found carrying two-allele pathogenic SLC26A4 mutations. The most frequently detected KCNJ10 mutation was c.812G>A (p.R271H). Compared with the normal-hearing control subjects, the occurrence rate of c.812G>A in NSEVA patients with lacking mutations in one or both alleles of SLC26A4 had no significant difference(1.53% vs. 5.30%, χ(2) = 2.798, p = 0.172), which suggested that it is probably a nonpathogenic benign variant. KCNJ10 c.1042C>T (p.R348C), the reported EVA-related mutation, was not found in patients with NSEVA who lacked mutations in either one or both alleles of SLC26A4. Furthermore, the normal-hearing parents of patients with NSEVA having two SLC26A4 mutations carried the KCNJ10 c.1042C>T or c.812G>A mutation and a SLC26A4 pathogenic mutation. SLC26A4 is the major genetic cause in Chinese NSEVA patients, accounting for 87.59%. KCNJ10 may not be a contributor to NSEVA in Chinese population. Other genetic or environmental factors are possibly play a role in the etiology of Chinese EVA patients with zero or monoallelic SLC26A4 mutation.",1
"Bone density in patients with late onset Pompe disease. ||  || Pompe disease is an inherited metabolic disorder characterized by α-glycosidase deficiency, which leads to lysosomal glycogen accumulation in many different tissues. The infantile form is the most severe with a rapidly fatal outcome, while the late onset form has a greater phenotypic variability, characterized by skeletal muscle dysfunction and early respiratory involvement. Bone mineral density (BMD) has been recently reported to be reduced in many patients with both forms of the disease. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) is now available with an undefined, impact on BMD in patients with late onset disease. The present study aimed to investigate BMD in patients with late onset form of Pompe disease before and after ERT initiation. Dual x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) was examined in four newly diagnosed patients with late onset Pompe disease and in four adults under ERT before and after ERT initiation with a treatment duration of 18 to 36 months. The initial DEXA showed normal total body BMD z-score in all the patients, while L2-L4 and femoral neck BMD was reduced in three and two patients, respectively. After ERT administration, two patients had an improvement in L2-L4 lumbar spine and one patient in femoral neck BMD z-score with values within normal range. The results suggested that regional BMD may moderately reduce in some patients with the late onset form of Pompe disease, although profound osteopenia was not observed. The improvement of measurements in L2-L4 and femoral neck BMD z-score in some patients with low pre-treatment values after ERT administration needs to be confirmed in larger scale studies.",1
"Long-term intravenous treatment of Pompe disease with recombinant human alpha-glucosidase from milk. || Animals Animals, Genetically Modified Cardiomegaly Child, Preschool Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Milk Muscle, Skeletal Psychomotor Performance Rabbits Recombinant Proteins Respiratory Insufficiency Survival Analysis Transgenes Treatment Outcome alpha-Galactosidase || Recent reports warn that the worldwide cell culture capacity is insufficient to fulfill the increasing demand for human protein drugs. Production in milk of transgenic animals is an attractive alternative. Kilogram quantities of product per year can be obtained at relatively low costs, even in small animals such as rabbits. We tested the long-term safety and efficacy of recombinant human -glucosidase (rhAGLU) from rabbit milk for the treatment of the lysosomal storage disorder Pompe disease. The disease occurs with an estimated frequency of 1 in 40,000 and is designated as orphan disease. The classic infantile form leads to death at a median age of 6 to 8 months and is diagnosed by absence of alpha-glucosidase activity and presence of fully deleterious mutations in the alpha-glucosidase gene. Cardiac hypertrophy is characteristically present. Loss of muscle strength prevents infants from achieving developmental milestones such as sitting, standing, and walking. Milder forms of the disease are associated with less severe mutations and partial deficiency of alpha-glucosidase. In the beginning of 1999, 4 critically ill patients with infantile Pompe disease (2.5-8 months of age) were enrolled in a single-center open-label study and treated intravenously with rhAGLU in a dose of 15 to 40 mg/kg/week. Genotypes of patients were consistent with the most severe form of Pompe disease. Additional molecular analysis failed to detect processed forms of alpha-glucosidase (95, 76, and 70 kDa) in 3 of the 4 patients and revealed only a trace amount of the 95-kDa biosynthetic intermediate form in the fourth (patient 1). With the more sensitive detection method, 35S-methionine incorporation, we could detect low-level synthesis of -glucosidase in 3 of the 4 patients (patients 1, 2, and 4) with some posttranslation modification from 110 kDa to 95 kDa in 1 of them (patient 1). One patient (patient 3) remained totally deficient with both detection methods (negative for cross-reactive immunologic material [CRIM negative]). The alpha-glucosidase activity in skeletal muscle and fibroblasts of all 4 patients was below the lower limit of detection (<2% of normal). The rhAGLU was tolerated well by the patients during >3 years of treatment. Anti-rhAGLU immunoglobulin G titers initially increased during the first 20 to 48 weeks of therapy but declined thereafter. There was no consistent difference in antibody formation comparing CRIM-negative with CRIM-positive patients. Muscle alpha-glucosidase activity increased from <2% to 10% to 20% of normal in all patients during the first 12 weeks of treatment with 15 to 20 mg/kg/week. For optimizing the effect, the dose was increased to 40 mg/kg/week. This resulted, 12 weeks later, in normal alpha-glucosidase activity levels, which were maintained until the last measurement in week 72. Importantly, all 4 patients, including the patient without any endogenous alpha-glucosidase (CRIM negative), revealed mature 76- and 70-kDa forms of -glucosidase on Western blot. Conversion of the 110-kDa precursor from milk to mature 76/70-kDa alpha-glucosidase provides evidence that the enzyme is targeted to lysosomes, where this proteolytic processing occurs. At baseline, patients had severe glycogen storage in the quadriceps muscle as revealed by strong periodic acid-Schiff--positive staining and lacework patterns in hematoxylin and eosin--stained tissue sections. The muscle pathology correlated at each time point with severity of signs. Periodic acid-Schiff intensity diminished and number of vacuoles increased during the first 12 weeks of treatment. Twelve weeks after dose elevation, we observed signs of muscle regeneration in 3 of the 4 patients. Obvious improvement of muscular architecture was seen only in the patient who learned to walk. Clinical effects were significant. All patients survived beyond the age of 4 years, whereas untreated patients succumb at a median age of 6 to 8 months. The characteristic cardiac hypertrophy present at start of treatment diminished significantly. The left ventricular mass index decreased from 171 to 599 g/m2 (upper limit of normal 86.6 g/m2 for infants from 0 to 1 year) to 70 to 160 g/m2 during 84 weeks of treatment. In addition, we found a significant change of slope for the diastolic thickness of the left ventricular posterior wall against time at t = 0 for each separate patient. Remarkably, the younger patients (patients 1 and 3) showed no significant respiratory problems during the first 2 years of life. One of the younger patients recovered from a life-threatening bronchiolitis at the age of 1 year without sequelae, despite borderline oxygen saturations at inclusion. At the age of 2, however, she became ventilator dependent after surgical removal of an infected Port-A-Cath. She died at the age of 4 years and 3 months suddenly after a short period of intractable fever of >42 degrees C, unstable blood pressure, and coma. The respiratory course of patient 1 remained uneventful. The 2 older patients, who both were hypercapnic (partial pressure of carbon dioxide: 10.6 and 9.8 kPa; normal range: 4.5-6.8 kPa) at start of treatment, became ventilator dependent before the first infusion (patient 2) and after 10 weeks of therapy (patient 4). Patient 4 was gradually weaned from the ventilator after 1 year of high-dose treatment and was eventually completely ventilator-free for 5 days, but this situation could not be maintained. Currently, both patients are completely ventilator dependent. The most remarkable progress in motor function was seen in the younger patients (patients 1 and 3). They achieved motor milestones that are unmet in infantile Pompe disease. Patient 1 learned to crawl (12 months), walk (16 months), squat (18 months), and climb stairs (22 months), and patient 3 learned to sit unsupported. The Alberta Infant Motor Scale score for patients 2, 3, and 4 remained far below p5. Patient 1 followed the p5 of normal. Our study shows that a safe and effective medicine can be produced in the milk of mammals and encourages additional development of enzyme replacement therapy for the several forms of Pompe disease. Restoration of skeletal muscle function and prevention of pulmonary insufficiency require dosing in the range of 20 to 40 mg/kg/week. The effect depends on residual muscle function at the start of treatment. Early start of treatment is required.",1
"Targeted screening for the detection of Pompe disease in patients with unclassified limb-girdle muscular dystrophy or asymptomatic hyperCKemia using dried blood: A Spanish cohort. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Creatine Kinase Delayed Diagnosis Dried Blood Spot Testing Female Genetic Testing Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Metabolic Diseases Middle Aged Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle Mutation Prospective Studies Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || We aimed to screen for Pompe disease in patients with unclassified limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) or asymptomatic hyperCKemia using dried blood spot (DBS) assays. Subsequently, we aimed to calculate the diagnostic delay between initial symptom presentation and the diagnosis. A prospective, multicenter, observational study was conducted in 348 patients: 146 with unclassified LGMD and 202 with asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic hyperCKemia. We quantified levels of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) from dried blood spots analyzed fluorometrically. The test was positive in 20 patients, and Pompe disease was confirmed by genetic testing in 16. Undiagnosed Pompe disease was detected in 7.5% of patients with LGMD and in 2.5% of patients with persistent, idiopathic elevation of serum creatine kinase. The c.-32-13 T > G mutation was found most commonly. The diagnostic delay was 15 years on average. In conclusion, DBS tests are useful and reliable screening tools for Pompe disease. We recommend the dried blood spot test to be included in the diagnostic work-up of patients with unclassified myopathies with proximal weakness and/or hyperCKemia of unknown cause and, when positive, to define the diagnosis, it will have to be confirmed by biochemical and/or molecular genetic analysis.",1 4
"Spectrum and frequency of SLC26A4 mutations among Czech patients with early hearing loss with and without Enlarged Vestibular Aqueduct (EVA). || Connexins Czech Republic Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Phenotype Prevalence Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Vestibular Aqueduct || Mutations in SLC26A4 cause Pendred syndrome (PS) - hearing loss with goitre - or DFNB4 - non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) with inner ear abnormalities such as Enlarged Vestibular Aqueduct (EVA) or Mondini Dysplasia (MD). We tested 303 unrelated Czech patients with early hearing loss (298 with NSHL and 5 with PS), all GJB2-negative, for SLC26A4 mutations and evaluated their clinical and radiological phenotype. Among 115 available HRCT/MRI scans we detected three MD (2.6%), three Mondini-like affections (2.6%), 16 EVA (13 bilateral - 19.2% and 15.6% respectively) and 61 EVA/MD-negative scans (73.4%). We found mutation(s) in 26 patients (8.6%) and biallelic mutations in eight patients (2.7%) out of 303 tested. In 18 of 26 (69%) patients, no second mutation could be detected even using MLPA. The spectrum of SLC26A4 mutations in Czech patients is broad without any prevalent mutation. We detected 21 different mutations (four novel). The most frequent mutations were p.Val138Phe and p.Leu445Trp (18% and 8.9% of pathogenic alleles respectively). Among 13 patients with bilateral EVA, six patients (50%) carry biallelic mutations. In EVA -negative patients no biallelic mutations were found but 4.9% had monoallelic mutations. SLC26A4 mutations are present mostly in patients with EVA/MD and/or progressive HL and those with affected siblings.",1
"Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in pompe disease is not limited to the classic infantile-onset phenotype. ||  || Pompe disease is a genetic disorder caused by a deficiency of acid α-glucosidase (GAA). Patients with classic infantile-onset Pompe disease usually present with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and die before 1 year of age, if not treated with enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). In comparison, patients with late-onset Pompe disease typically do not have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. However, here we describe five patients who presented with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy but did not fit the criteria of classic infantile-onset Pompe disease. Their ages at diagnosis of cardiomyopathy were 1 month in two patients following detection of an audible cardiac murmur and 2-3 years in the three remaining patients. All patients survived for 5-8 years without ERT. Three patients died before the advent of ERT from causes other than congestive heart failure. One patient had a good response to ERT starting at 5 years of age. The sibling of one patient, who did not receive ERT and died at age seven, was diagnosed prenatally. At 3 months of age, the sibling had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and a muscle biopsy at that time revealed glycogen accumulation.This case series demonstrates that Pompe disease is a continuum of disease, and the development of cardiomyopathy is not limited to classic infantile-onset Pompe disease. These patients do not fit into the discrete phenotypes of infantile- or late-onset Pompe disease, which may suggest reconsidering the nomenclature of Pompe disease.",1 4
"The impact of antibodies on clinical outcomes in diseases treated with therapeutic protein: lessons learned from infantile Pompe disease. ||  || Enzyme replacement therapy with rhGAA (Myozyme®) has lead to improved survival, which is largely attributable to improvements in cardiomyopathy and skeletal muscle function. However, crossreactive immunologic material-negative patients have a poor clinical response to enzyme replacement therapy secondary to high sustained antibody titers. Furthermore, although the majority of crossreactive immunologic material-positive patients tolerize or experience a downtrend in anti-rhGAA antibody titers, antibody response is variable with some crossreactive immunologic material-positive infants also mounting high sustained antibody titers. We retrospectively analyzed 34 infants with Pompe disease: 11 crossreactive immunologic material-negative patients, nine high-titer crossreactive immunologic material-positive patients, and 14 low-titer crossreactive immunologic material-positive patients. Clinical outcome measures were overall survival, ventilator-free survival, left ventricular mass index, Alberta Infant Motor Scale score, and urine Glc(4) levels. Clinical outcomes in the high-titer crossreactive immunologic material-positive group were poor across all areas evaluated relative to the low-titer crossreactive immunologic material-positive group. For the crossreactive immunologic material-negative and high-titer crossreactive immunologic material-positive groups, no statistically significant differences were observed for any outcome measures, and both patient groups did poorly. Our data indicate that, irrespective of crossreactive immunologic material status, patients with infantile Pompe disease with high sustained antibody titer have an attenuated therapeutic response to enzyme replacement therapy. With the advent of immunomodulation therapies, identification of patients at risk for developing high sustained antibody titer is critical.",1
"Effect of enzyme therapy in juvenile patients with Pompe disease: a three-year open-label study. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Muscle, Skeletal Recombinant Proteins Treatment Outcome || Pompe disease is a rare neuromuscular disorder caused by deficiency of acid α-glucosidase. Treatment with recombinant human α-glucosidase recently received marketing approval based on prolonged survival of affected infants. The current open-label study was performed to evaluate the response in older children (age 5.9-15.2 years). The five patients that we studied had limb-girdle muscle weakness and three of them also had decreased pulmonary function in upright and supine position. They received 20-mg/kg recombinant human α-glucosidase every two weeks over a 3-year period. No infusion-associated reactions were observed. Pulmonary function remained stable (n = 4) or improved slightly (n = 1). Muscle strength increased. Only one patient approached the normal range. Patients obtained higher scores on the Quick Motor Function Test. None of the patients deteriorated. Follow-up data of two unmatched historical cohorts of adults and children with Pompe disease were used for comparison. They showed an average decline in pulmonary function of 1.6% and 5% per year. Data on muscle strength and function of untreated children were not available. Further studies are required.",3 1
"In vitro and in vivo correlations for I65T and M1V mutations at the phenylalanine hydroxylase locus. ||  || Mutations at the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) locus are the major cause of hyperphenylalaninemia. We have previously described four mutations (M1V, IVS12nt1, R408W, and S349P) at the PAH locus in French Canadians with ancestry in eastern Quebec. Here we report (1) identification of another mutation, on a haplotype 9 chromosome, which converts codon 65 from isoleucine (ATT) to threonine (ACT), (2) expression analysis of the I65T mutation in COS cells demonstrating 75% loss of both immunoreactive protein and enzyme activity, and (3) expression analysis of the most prevalent PKU allele (M1V) in eastern Quebec, showing nondetectable levels of PAH protein and activity, a finding compatible with a mutation in the translation initiation codon. Homozygosity for M1V and codominant inheritance of I65T/R408W were both associated with classical phenylketonuria.",1 0
"[Clinical features and acid alpha-glucosidase gene mutation in 7 Chinese patients with glycogen storage disease type II]. ||  || To explore the clinical features and acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) gene mutations of Chinese patients with glycogen storage disease typeII(GSDII). Seven patients with GSDII were diagnosed by muscle pathology examination at Department of Neurology, Peking University First Hospital from 2003 to 2011. One patient with infant-onset presented development retardation, generalized muscle weakness, dyspnea, cardiomegaly and hepatomegaly. Six cases were of late-onset ranging from 1 to 29 years. Their main clinical features included progressive muscle weakness. Two patients developed respiratory insufficiency. Increased serum creatine kinase was detected in all of them. Electromyography studies showed myopathic (n = 5) and neuropathic (n = 1) changes. Muscle biopsies showed basophilic vacuoles in muscle fibers containing a large amounts of glycogen on electron microscopy. GAA gene mutation was detected by direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) product. Novel mutations were screened in 100 normal controls. GAA gene mutations were found in all of them, including 10 point mutations and 1 frameshift deletion. Six mutations (p. P361L, p. P266S, p.R437C, p.R600C, p.W746S and p.W746*) have been reported before. And five novel mutations (p.R168Q, p.R168P, p.E521V, p.R594H and c.827_845del) were found in this study. None of these novel mutations were found in 100 normal controls except for p.R168Q mutation in two normal controls. p. P361L and p.W746* were detected in two unrelated GSDII patients while other mutations were carried by only one patient. In our study, we found several novel GAA mutations in Chinese patients with GSDII. No hot spot mutation of GAA gene existed in our patient group. However, p. P266S, p. P361L and p.R437C might be associated with late-onset GSDII.",1
"Usher syndrome: an effective sequencing approach to establish a genetic and clinical diagnosis. || Adult Alleles Cadherins Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Genetic Counseling High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Myosins Nerve Tissue Proteins Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by retinitis pigmentosa, sensorineural hearing loss and, in some cases, vestibular dysfunction. The disorder is clinically and genetically heterogeneous and, to date, mutations in 11 genes have been described. This finding makes difficult to get a precise molecular diagnosis and offer patients accurate genetic counselling. To overcome this problem and to increase our knowledge of the molecular basis of Usher syndrome, we designed a targeted resequencing custom panel. In a first validation step a series of 16 Italian patients with known molecular diagnosis were analysed and 31 out of 32 alleles were detected (97% of accuracy). After this step, 31 patients without a molecular diagnosis were enrolled in the study. Three out of them with an uncertain Usher diagnosis were excluded. One causative allele was detected in 24 out 28 patients (86%) while the presence of both causative alleles characterized 19 patients out 28 (68%). Sixteen novel and 27 known alleles were found in the following genes: USH2A (50%), MYO7A (7%), CDH23 (11%), PCDH15 (7%) and USH1G (2%). Overall, on the 44 patients the protocol was able to characterize 74 alleles out of 88 (84%). These results suggest that our panel is an effective approach for the genetic diagnosis of Usher syndrome leading to: 1) an accurate molecular diagnosis, 2) better genetic counselling, 3) more precise molecular epidemiology data fundamental for future interventional plans.",1
"PKU mutations R408Q and F299C in Norway: haplotype associations, geographic distributions and phenotype characteristics. || Adolescent Adult Base Sequence Child Child, Preschool DNA Restriction Enzymes Exons Female Gene Frequency Haplotypes Humans Infant Male Molecular Sequence Data Norway Pedigree Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic || Details are given concerning the phenylketonuria (PKU) mutations R408Q and F299C. Both mutations were identified among 47 PKU patients, derived from the Norwegian PKU registry. A novel PKU mutation (R408Q) was identified, by single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis, on six out of eight mutant haplotype 12 chromosomes and on none of the other PKU chromosomes. The F299C mutation occurred exclusively on mutant haplotype 8, and was the only mutation associated with this haplotype (on six chromosomes). One patient homozygous for each mutation was found. The patient homozygous for F299C manifested severe PKU, whereas the R408Q homozygote exhibited a mild PKU variant. Pedigree analysis of these families has not, so far, revealed consanguinity. Information on the place of birth of the relevant grandparents of the PKU patients with these mutations suggests that each of these mutations in Norway has originated from a common gene source.",3 1
"The value of muscle biopsies in Pompe disease: identifying lipofuscin inclusions in juvenile- and adult-onset patients. || Adult Age of Onset Autophagy Biopsy Early Diagnosis Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Inclusion Bodies Lipofuscin Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 2 Male Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal || Pompe disease, an inherited deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA), is a metabolic myopathy with heterogeneous clinical presentations. Late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) is a debilitating progressive muscle disorder that can occur anytime from early childhood to late adulthood. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with recombinant human GAA is currently available for Pompe patients. Although ERT shows some benefits, the reversal of skeletal muscle pathology - lysosomal glycogen accumulation and autophagic buildup - remains a challenge. In this study, we examined the clinical status and muscle pathology of 22 LOPD patients and one atypical infantile patient on ERT to understand the reasons for muscle resistance to ERT. The patients were divided into three groups for analysis, based on the age of onset and diagnosis: adult-onset patients, juvenile-onset patients, and those identified through newborn screening (NBS). The areas of autophagic buildup found in patients' biopsies of all three groups, contained large autofluorescent inclusions which we show are made of lipofuscin, an indigestible intralysosomal material typically associated with ageing. These inclusions, analysed by staining, spectral analysis, time-resolved Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging (FLIM), and Second Harmonic Generation (SHG) imaging, were the major pathology remaining in many fibers after ERT. The best outcome of ERT both clinically and morphologically was observed in the NBS patients. The muscle biopsy, in spite of its shortcomings, allowed us to recognize an underreported, ERT-resistant pathology in LOPD; numerous lysosomes and autolysosomes loaded with lipofuscin appear to be a hallmark of LOPD skeletal muscle. Lipofuscin accumulation - a result of inefficient lysosomal degradation - may in turn exacerbate both lysosomal and autophagic abnormalities.",1
"Two novel genetic lesions and a common BH4-responsive mutation of the PAH gene in Italian patients with hyperphenylalaninemia. || DNA Mutational Analysis Humans Italy Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA), due to a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) enzyme, is caused by mutations in the PAH gene. Molecular analysis in 23 Italian patients with PAH deficiency identified two novel (P281R, L287V) and 20 previously described genetic lesions in the PAH gene. The detection of the A403V amino acid substitution in combination with null mutations in patients with BH4-responsive PAH deficiency leads us to correlate it with BH4 responsiveness.",3 1
"Single-strand conformation polymorphism for detection of mutations and base substitutions in phenylketonuria. || Base Sequence DNA DNA, Single-Stranded Exons Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic || In the past few years, more than 20 different mutations have been reported in hyperphenylalaninemias. In southwestern Europe and Mediterranean countries, however, the mutant genotypes reported account for only a fraction (27%) of all mutant alleles at the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) locus, and most of the mutations causing the disease remain unknown. In order to develop a strategy for rapid detection of mutation-containing exons, we applied the single-strand conformation-polymorphism (SSCP) technique to exons 3, 5, 7, and 12 of the PAH gene. We observed five abnormal patterns of migration in mutant PAH genes, and we consistently found base substitutions in the corresponding exons, with no false-positive results. By this procedure, two novel putative mutations were detected in the seventh exon of the PAH gene, (A259V and Y277D) and we were able to demonstrate that the delta I94, R158Q, R408W, and E280K mutations were easily detectable by the SSCP technique. This procedure is therefore of particular interest for rapid detection of mutation-containing exons and for determination of further genotype-phenotype correlations in hyperphenylalaninemias.",2 1 3
"Distinct and novel SLC26A4/Pendrin mutations in Chinese and U.S. patients with nonsyndromic hearing loss. || Alleles Animals Asian Continental Ancestry Group Base Sequence China Chlorides Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid DNA Mutational Analysis European Continental Ancestry Group Female Gene Frequency Genotype Hearing Loss Humans Ion Transport Membrane Transport Proteins Microscopy, Confocal Mutation Oocytes Sulfate Transporters United States Vestibular Aqueduct Xenopus laevis || Mutations of the human SLC26A4/PDS gene constitute the most common cause of syndromic and nonsyndromic hearing loss. Definition of the SLC26A4 mutation spectrum among different populations with sensorineural hearing loss is important for development of optimal genetic screening services for congenital hearing impairment. We screened for SLC26A4 mutations among Chinese and U.S. subjects with hearing loss, using denaturing HPLC (DHPLC) and direct DNA sequencing. Fifty-two of 55 Chinese subjects with deafness accompanied by enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct (EVA) exhibited at least one mutant SLC26A4 allele, whereas SLC26A4 mutations were found in only 2 of 116 deaf Chinese patients without EVA. The spectrum of SLC26A4 mutations differed among Chinese and U.S. subjects and included 10 previously unreported SLC26A4 variants: 4 in the Chinese population (p.E303Q, p.X329, p.X467, p.X573) and 6 in the U.S. population (p.V250A, p.D266N, p.F354S, p.D697A, p.K715N, p.E737D). Among the seven novel in-frame missense mutations, five encoded SLC26A4 proteins with substantially reduced Cl(-)/anion exchange activity as expressed and measured in Xenopus oocytes, but four of these were sufficiently active to allow study of anion selectivity. The only mutant polypeptide exhibiting complete loss of anion exchange function, p.E303Q, was expressed at or near the oocyte surface at near-wild-type levels. Two variants, p.F354S and p.E737D, displayed selective reduction in relative rate of Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchange compared with similarly measured rates of Cl(-)/Cl(-) and Cl(-)/I(-) exchange. Our data show that mutation analysis of the SLC26A4 gene is of high diagnostic yield among subjects with deafness and bilateral EVA in both China and the U.S. However, the pathogenicity of monoallelic SLC26A4 gene variants in patients with hearing loss remains unclear in many instances.",1
"Extended phenotype description and new molecular findings in late onset glycogen storage disease type II: a northern Italy population study and review of the literature. || Adult Age of Onset Cohort Studies Community Health Planning DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Italy Male Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal Mutation Phenotype Statistics as Topic alpha-Glucosidases beta-Glucosidase || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII) is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by acid alpha-1,4-glucosidase deficiency and associated with recessive mutations in its coding gene GAA. Few studies have provided so far a detailed phenotypical characterization in late onset GSDII (LO-GSDII) patients. Genotype-phenotype correlation has been previously attempted with controversial results. We aim to provide an in-depth description of a cohort (n = 36) of LO-GSDII patients coming from the north of Italy and compare our population's findings to the literature. We performed a clinical record-based retrospective and prospective study of our patients. LO-GSDII in our cohort covers a large variability of phenotype including subtle clinical presentation and did not differ significantly from previous data. In all patients, molecular analysis disclosed GAA mutations, five of them being novel. To assess potential genotype-phenotype correlations we divided IVS1-32-13T>G heterozygous patients into two groups following the severity of the mutations on the second allele. Our patients harbouring ""severe"" mutations (n = 21) presented a strong tendency to have more severe phenotypes and more disability, more severe phenotypes and more disability, higher prevalence of assisted ventilation and a shorter time of evolution to show it. The determination of prognostic factors is mandatory in order to refine the accuracy of prognostic information, to develop follow-up strategy and, more importantly, to improve the decision algorithm for enzyme replacement therapy administration. The demonstration of genotype-phenotype correlations could help to reach this objective. Clinical assessment homogeneity is required to overcome limitations due to the lack of power of most studies.",3 1
"Molecular analysis of phenylketonuria (PKU) in newborns from Texas. ||  || This study describes the mutations at the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) locus in patients with the diagnosis of classic PKU (n=18), hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) variant (n=9) and benign persistent hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) (n=13) who were identified by the Texas Newborn Screening Program. Blinded studies were done by sequencing of the 13 exons and exon-intron boundaries of the PAH gene in genomic DNA isolated from dry blood spots. Thirty-six different mutations, including 25 missense mutations, six splice mutations, three deletions and two nonsense mutations were detected in 75 of the 80 mutant alleles (94%). The prevalent mutations were R408W (19%), V388M and IVS10nt-11g->a (6% each), Y414C (5%) and H170D, A403V, T380M and IVS7nt1g->a (4% each). Two novel missense mutations were identified in exon 5 (H170D and N167S). There was genotype/phenotype correlation in 33/40 cases (83%). For this population, exons 12, 11, 7, 5 and 8, which carry 78% of the mutations, would have to be screened first. However, the other exons must be studied when either one or no mutations are found in the primary screening. Hum Mutat 17:523, 2001.",3 1
"Functional and structural characterization of novel mutations and genotype-phenotype correlation in 51 phenylalanine hydroxylase deficient families from Southern Italy. || Adolescent Adult Amino Acid Sequence Child Child, Preschool Dihydropteridine Reductase Female Genotype Humans Italy Male Models, Molecular Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Protein Conformation || Hyperphenylalaninemia (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database: 261600) is an autosomal recessive disorder mainly due to mutations in the gene for phenylalanine hydroxylase; the most severe form of hyperphenylalaninemia is classic phenylketonuria. We sequenced the entire gene for phenylalanine hydroxylase in 51 unrelated hyperphenylalaninemia patients from Southern Italy. The entire locus was genotyped in 46 out of 51 hyperphenylalaninemia patients, and 32 different disease-causing mutations were identified. The pathologic nature of two novel gene variants, namely, c.707-2delA and p.Q301P, was demonstrated by in vitro studies. c.707-2delA is a splicing mutation that involves the accepting site of exon 7; it causes the complete skipping of exon 7 and results in the truncated p.T236MfsX60 protein. The second gene variant, p.Q301P, has very low residual enzymatic activity (approximately 4.4%), which may be ascribed, in part, to a low expression level (8-10%). Both the decreased enzyme activity and the low expression level are supported by analysis of the 3D structure of the molecule. The putative structural alterations induced by p.Q301P are compatible with protein instability and perturbance of monomer interactions within dimers and tetramers, although they do not affect the catalytic site. In vivo studies showed tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness in the p.Q301P carrier but not in the c.707-2delA carrier. We next investigated genotype-phenotype correlations and found that genotype was a good predictor of phenotype in 76% of patients. However, genotype-phenotype discordance occurred in approximately 25% of our patients, mainly those bearing mutations p.L48S, p.R158Q, p.R261Q and p.P281L.",3 1
"Mutation spectrum of the PAH gene in the PKU patients from Khorasan Razavi province of Iran. || Base Sequence Consanguinity DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Female Genetic Association Studies Homozygote Humans Iran Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Characterization of the molecular basis of phenylketonuria (PKU) in North-east of Iran has been accomplished through the analysis of 62 unrelated chromosomes from 31 Iranian PKU patients. Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene mutations have been analyzed by direct DNA sequencing exons 6, 7, 10 and 11. A mutation detection rate of 74% was achieved. Eleven different mutations were found, with the most frequent mutation, IVS10-11G>A, accounting for 19% of Khorasan-Razavi PKU alleles. Ten mutations (R176X, E280K, IVS11+1G>C, S231P, Q383X, R243X, I224T, E390G, R252W and P281L) represent the rest PKU chromosomes. One novel mutation, Q383X in the homozygote form was identified which is located in the catalytic domain (residues143-410). With this high detection rate of mutations in North-east of Iran, new strategy for carrier testing could be DNA sequencing of these four exons. The other exons and boundaries will be studied only when either one or no mutations are detected in the initial screen.",3 1
"Response of 33 UK patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease to enzyme replacement therapy. ||  || Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) for infantile-onset Pompe disease has been commercially available for almost 10 years. We report the experience of its use in a cohort treated at three specialist lysosomal treatment centres in the UK. A retrospective case-note review was performed, with additional data being gathered from two national audits on all such patients treated with ERT. The impact on the outcome of various characteristics, measured just prior to the initiation of ERT (baseline), was evaluated using logistic regression. Thirty-three patients were identified; 13/29 (45%) were cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM) negative, and nine were immunomodulated. At baseline assessment, 79% were in heart failure, 66% had failure to thrive and 70% had radiological signs of focal pulmonary collapse. The overall survival rate was 60%, ventilation-free survival was 40% and 30% of patients were ambulatory. Median follow-up of survivors was 4 years, 1.5 months (range 6 months to 13.5 years). As with previous studies, the CRIM status impacted on all outcome measures. However, in this cohort, baseline failure to thrive was related to death and lack of ambulation, and left ventricular dilatation was a risk factor for non-ventilator-free survival. The outcome of treated patients remains heterogeneous despite attempts at immunomodulation. Failure to thrive at baseline and left ventricular dilation appear to be associated with poorer outcomes.",3 1
"Two new missense mutations of GAA in late onset glycogen storage disease type II. || Adult Child DNA Mutational Analysis Family Health Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Korea Lysine Male Methionine Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Proline Serine alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSD II) is an autosomal recessive disorder resulting from a deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA, or acid maltase). In this study, we aimed to characterize phenotype and genotype in three patients with late onset GSD II in Korea. Clinically, all of our patients showed typical features of late onset GSD II with the reduced GAA enzyme activities. The respiratory difficulty preceding ambulatory failure seems to be one of the most remarkable clinical features characterizing late onset GSD II. By direct sequence analysis of PCR-amplified genomic DNA obtained from patients' skeletal muscle or peripheral leukocytes, we identified four missense mutations. Two of them (p.266Pro>Ser and p.439Met>Lys) were new missense mutations causing late onset GSD II, which had not been reported elsewhere before. One of them (p.439Met>Lys) was found in two alleles from each patient, suggesting it could be a recurrent mutation among Korean population.",1
"Atypical immunologic response in a patient with CRIM-negative Pompe disease. || Cross Reactions Enzyme Replacement Therapy Fatal Outcome Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant, Newborn Pregnancy Prenatal Diagnosis Recombinant Proteins Serologic Tests Treatment Failure alpha-Glucosidases || We report the clinical course of a patient with severe infantile onset Pompe disease [cross-reactive immunologic material (CRIM) negative, R854X/R854X] who was diagnosed prenatally and received standard dosing of alglucosidase alfa (Myozyme®) enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) from day 10 of life until she passed away at the age of 3 years 9 months. In the immediate neonatal period there was cardiomegaly on chest X-ray, cardiac hypertrophy by echocardiogram, and development of a wide complex tachycardia. CRIM negative (CN) status was suspected based on her family history, and the available data at the time indicated that CN patients had limited survival even with ERT. However, given the opportunity for very early treatment, the treating provider and family elected to initiate treatment with ERT, without immune modulation. By 9 months of age echocardiogram was normal. Early motor development was within normal limits but by 2 years of age her developmental progress had slowed. She seroconverted by the 4th month of ERT, and anti-rhGAA antibody titers peaked at 25,600 in the 27th month. Immunomodulatory therapy was considered but declined by family. She acquired Influenza A at 2 years 6 months, which led to a prolonged hospitalization with invasive respiratory support, and placement of tracheostomy and gastrostomy tube. Her developmental progress ceased, and she died suddenly at home from a presumed cardiac event at age 3 years 9 months. The poor outcomes observed in CN patients have been attributed to the development of high sustained antibody titers. Although this CN patient's anti-rhGAA response was elevated and sustained, it is unlike any of the 3 patterns that have been previously described: high titer CN, high titer CRIM positive (HTCP), and low titer CP (LTCP) patients. This patient's clinical course, with achievement of 24 months of motor gains, 30 months of ventilator-free survival and 45 month survival, is like that of only a fraction of ERT treated CN patients, yet it is identical to other reported CN patients in its relentless progression and early fatality. The immunologic response (moderate sustained antibody titers) described here has not been previously reported and may have played a role in the overall pattern of developmental decline. In light of proposed universal newborn screening for Pompe disease, there is an urgent need for improved understanding of the interplay between immunologic responses to the only available treatment, ERT, and the relentless nature of this disease in CN patients.",3 1
"Glycogenosis type II: identification and expression of three novel mutations in the acid alpha-glucosidase gene causing the infantile form of the disease. || Animals COS Cells Cells, Cultured Cercopithecus aethiops Endoplasmic Reticulum Female Fibroblasts Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Golgi Apparatus Humans Infant Mutation Skin alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogenosis type II (GSDII) is an autosomal recessive disorder due to the deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA). We identified three novel point mutations, C399A, T1064C, and C2104T, in three unrelated Italian patients with the infantile form of the disease. The C399A mutation was present in homozygosity in proband 1. The C >A transition introduces a premature stop signal in exon 2 resulting in no enzyme production that is correlated with the severe clinical phenotype in this patient. The other two nucleotide changes were missense mutations. The T1064C mutation, which changes Leu in position 355 into Pro, was carried in homozygosity by proband 2. The C2104T nucleotide change, which substitutes Arg 702 into Cys, was present in proband 3 in combination with a known severe mutation DeltaI17-18. The in vitro expression in COS-1 cells of T1064C and C2104T constructs demonstrated no enzymatic activity with respect to the negative control cells. Western blot analysis revealed that both T1064C and C2104T mutant proteins produced in COS-1 cells migrated in SDS-PAGE as the GAA inactive precursor of 110kDa. Immunofluorescence detection of mutant alpha-glucosidases showed enzyme localization primarily in the ER-Golgi compartment, suggesting that T1064C and C2104T mutations could affect the normal processing and stability of the enzyme. In vitro studies demonstrated that the same degree of deficiency in T1064C and C2104T mutations, which is in contrast with patient phenotype. A better correlation was observed with the in vivo studies since proband 2, with a less severe phenotype, presented with low residual enzyme activity while in proband 3, with a classic severe infantile onset GSDII, fibroblast enzyme activity was completely absent.",1 0
"Late-onset Pompe disease in France: molecular features and epidemiology from a nationwide study. ||  || Pompe disease (PD) is caused by a deficiency of lysosomal acid α-glucosidase resulting from mutations in the GAA gene. The clinical spectrum ranges from a rapidly fatal multisystemic disorder (classic PD, onset < 1 year) to a milder adult onset myopathy. The aims of this study were to characterize the GAA mutations, to establish the disease epidemiology, and to identify potential genotype-phenotype correlations in French late-onset PD patients (onset ≥ 2 years) diagnosed since the 1970s. Data were collected from the two main laboratories involved in PD diagnosis and from the French Pompe registry. Two hundred forty-six patients (130 females and 116 males) were included, with a mean age at diagnosis of 43 years. Eighty-three different mutations were identified in the GAA gene, among which 28 were novel. These variants were spread all over the sequence and included 42 missense (one affecting start codon), 8 nonsense, 15 frameshift, 14 splice mutations, 3 small in-frame deletions, and one large deletion. The common c.-32-13T>G mutation was detected in 151/170 index cases. Other frequent mutations included the exon 18 deletion, the c.525del, and the missense mutations c.1927G>A (p.Gly643Arg) and c.655G>A (p.Gly219Arg). Patients carrying the c.-32-13T>G mutation had an older mean age at onset than patients non-exhibiting this mutation (36 versus 25 years). Patients with the same genotype had a highly variable age at onset. We estimated the frequency of late-onset PD in France around 1/69,927 newborns. In conclusion, we characterized the French cohort of late-onset PD patients through a nationwide study covering more than 40 years.",1 4
"Discordant phenylketonuria phenotypes in one family: the relationship between genotype and clinical outcome is a function of multiple effects. || Aged Child Exons Female Genetic Heterogeneity Haplotypes Humans Infant, Newborn Male Middle Aged Minisatellite Repeats Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Four members spanning three generations of one family have phenylketonuria of varying degrees of severity. Two first cousins were screened in the neonatal period and have had dietary phenylalanine restriction since diagnosis, the older patient having been classified as having more severe PKU and the younger one as having mild PKU. Their mutual grandfather and his older brother also have a significant hyperphenylalaninaemia and are of normal intelligence despite never having had restricted phenylalanine intake. Mutation analysis of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene has established that there are four different mutations, two in exon 2 (F39L and L48S) and two in exon 3 (R111X and S67P), which give rise to PKU in this family. In order to establish their relative severity, we screened the PKU populations of western Scotland and the south west of England for these mutations. The exon 3 mutations are rare; however, F39L is relatively common in Scotland and L48S in England. A comparison of diagnostic blood phenylalanine concentrations in subjects carrying L48S/null or F39L/null mutations with those carrying two null mutations suggest that these exon 2 mutations are less deleterious. Thus, in this family, the different biochemical phenotypes can be explained, in part, by different genotypes at the PAH locus but our results show that the relationship between genotype and clinical outcome is more complex and is a function of multiple effects.",1
"A combination of two truncating mutations in USH2A causes more severe and progressive hearing impairment in Usher syndrome type IIa. || Adolescent Adult Aged Audiometry Audiometry, Pure-Tone Auditory Threshold Cross-Sectional Studies Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Genetic Association Studies Genotype Hearing Humans Linear Models Male Middle Aged Mutation Netherlands Phenotype Retrospective Studies Sweden Usher Syndromes Young Adult || Usher syndrome is an inherited disorder that is characterized by hearing impairment (HI), retinitis pigmentosa, and in some cases vestibular dysfunction. Usher syndrome type IIa is caused by mutations in USH2A. HI in these patients is highly heterogeneous and the present study evaluates the effects of different types of USH2A mutations on the audiometric phenotype. Data from two large centres of expertise on Usher Syndrome in the Netherlands and Sweden were combined in order to create a large combined sample of patients to identify possible genotype-phenotype correlations. A retrospective study on HI in 110 patients (65 Dutch and 45 Swedish) genetically diagnosed with Usher syndrome type IIa. We used methods especially designed for characterizing and testing differences in audiological phenotype between patient subgroups. These methods included Age Related Typical Audiograms (ARTA) and a method to evaluate the difference in the degree of HI developed throughout life between subgroups. Cross-sectional linear regression analysis of last-visit audiograms for the best hearing ear demonstrated a gradual decline of hearing over decades. The congenital level of HI was in the range of 16-33 dB at 0.25-0.5 kHz, and in the range of 51-60 dB at 1-8 kHz. The annual threshold deterioration was in the range of 0.4-0.5 dB/year at 0.25-2 kHz and in the range of 0.7-0.8 dB/year at 4-8 kHz. Patients with two truncating mutations, including homozygotes for the common c.2299delG mutation, developed significantly more severe HI throughout life than patients with one truncating mutation combined with one nontruncating mutation, and patients with two nontruncating mutations. The results have direct implications for patient counselling in terms of prognosis of hearing and may serve as baseline measures for future (genetic) therapeutic interventions.",1
"Prenatal diagnosis of Chinese families with phenylketonuria. ||  || The aim of this study is to investigate the ability to prenatally diagnose phenylketonuria (PKU) by using phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene mutation analysis combined with short tandem repeat (STR) linkage analysis in 118 fetuses from 112 Chinese families. Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood from members of 112 families and the exons and exon-intron boundaries of the PAH gene were amplified by PCR. PCR products were analyzed by bi-directional Sanger sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). The three variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) markers PAH-1, PAH-26, PAH-32 were used in the prenatal diagnosis for the PKU families. We identified a spectrum of 63 different mutations, including 61 point mutations and indels, two large exon deletion mutations, and five novel mutations. A substantial proportion of mutant alleles were accounted for by p.R243Q (15.62%), EX6-96AG (9.82%), p.V399V (7.59%), p.Y356X (6.70%), and p.R413P (5.36%). The same mutations were identified in 31 prenatally genotyped fetuses. We identified 58 fetuses that carried only one mutant allele and 29 fetuses that carried no mutations of PAH and were presumed normal. PAH gene mutation analysis combined with STR linkage analysis can provide rapid and accurate prenatal diagnosis for PKU families.",3 1
"Identification of seven new mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene, associated with hyperphenylalaninemia in the Belgian population. ||  || ",1
"Genetic landscape and novel disease mechanisms from a large LGMD cohort of 4656 patients. ||  || Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs), one of the most heterogeneous neuromuscular disorders (NMDs), involves predominantly proximal-muscle weakness with >30 genes associated with different subtypes. The clinical-genetic overlap among subtypes and with other NMDs complicate disease-subtype identification lengthening diagnostic process, increases overall costs hindering treatment/clinical-trial recruitment. Currently seven LGMD clinical trials are active but still no gene-therapy-related treatment is available. Till-date no nation-wide large-scale LGMD sequencing program was performed. Our objectives were to understand LGMD genetic basis, different subtypes' relative prevalence across US and investigate underlying disease mechanisms. A total of 4656 patients with clinically suspected-LGMD across US were recruited to conduct next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based gene-panel testing during June-2015 to June-2017 in CLIA-CAP-certified Emory-Genetics-Laboratory. Thirty-five LGMD-subtypes-associated or LGMD-like other NMD-associated genes were investigated. Main outcomes were diagnostic yield, gene-variant spectrum, and LGMD subtypes' prevalence in a large US LGMD-suspected population. Molecular diagnosis was established in 27% (1259 cases; 95% CI, 26-29%) of the patients with major contributing genes to LGMD phenotypes being: CAPN3(17%),DYSF(16%),FKRP(9%) andANO5(7%). We observed an increased prevalence of genetically confirmed late-onset Pompe disease,DNAJB6-associated LGMD subtype1E andCAPN3-associated autosomal-dominant LGMDs. Interestingly, we identified a high prevalence of patients with pathogenic variants in more than one LGMD gene suggesting possible synergistic heterozygosity/digenic/multigenic contribution to disease presentation/progression that needs consideration as a part of diagnostic modality. Overall, this study has improved our understanding of the relative prevalence of different LGMD subtypes, their respective genetic etiology, and the changing paradigm of their inheritance modes and novel mechanisms that will allow for improved timely treatment, management, and enrolment of molecularly diagnosed individuals in clinical trials.",1
"Mutational spectrum of phenylketonuria in Jiangsu province. || Alleles China DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Male Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Prevalence Retrospective Studies || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is caused by variants in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. We systematically investigated all 13 exons of the PAH gene and their flanking introns in 31 unrelated patients and their parents using next-generation sequencing (NGS). A total of 33 different variants were identified in 58 of 62 mutant PAH alleles. The prevalent variants with a relative frequency of 5 % or more were c.721C > T, c.1068C > A, c.611A > G, c.1197A > T, c.728G > A, c.331C > T, and c.442-1G > A. One novel variant was identified in this study-c.699C > G. We studied genotype-phenotype correlations using the Guldberg arbitrary value (AV) system, which revealed a consistency rate of 38 % (8/21) among the 21 predicted phenotypes. The genotype-based prediction of BH4 responsiveness was also evaluated, and 14 patients (45.2 %) were predicted to be BH4 responsive. This study presents the spectrum of PAH variants in Jiangsu province. The information obtained from the genotype-based prediction of BH4 responsiveness might be used for the rational selection of candidates for BH4 testing. • Phenylketonuria (PKU) is caused by variants in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. • The spectrum of PAH variants in different Chinese populations has been reported. What is new: • This is the first report on the spectrum of PAH variants in Jiangsu province. • This study identified one novel PAH variant-c.699C>G-and and tries to show a genotype-phenotype relationship also regarding BH4-responsiveness.",3 1
"[In vitro expression study of novel mutations in phenylalanine hydroxylase gene]. ||  || To study the in vitro expression of 6 novel missense mutations (R270G, P275A, F121L, A156P, E183G, I324N) and a previously described R408Q mutation of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene and explore the genotype-phenotype correlation through comparison of protein levels and residual enzyme activities. Seven expression vectors containing PAH cDNA were constructed with a site-directed mutagenesis kit. The plasmids were extracted and sequenced to confirm the target mutations. pcDNA3.0 containing PAH cDNA was transfected into COS-7 cells and total proteins were extracted 48 h after transfection. The quantities of proteins and residual enzyme activities of the 7 mutants were assessed with the wild-type PAH gene as reference. Relative quantities of PAH proteins for R270G, P275A, F121L, A156P, E183G, I324N and R408Q were 10.5%, 56.6%, 54.3%, 8.7%, 8.5%, 67.3% and 85.4%, respectively. The residual enzyme activities were 7.7%, 27.6%, 19.0%, 10.4%, 9.1%, 50.6% and 40.2%, respectively. PAH residual enzyme activities of 7 PAH mutants were all significantly reduced.",1 0
"Unresponsiveness to tetrahydrobiopterin of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. || Adolescent Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Genotype Humans Infant Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Statistics, Nonparametric Tyrosine Young Adult || Conflicting results have been reported concerning the efficacy of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), the cofactor of phenylalanine hydroxylase, for reducing phenylalanine (Phe) concentration in phenylketonuria (PKU). We aimed to test quantitatively the effects of BH4 in PKU patients. Seven fully characterized patients were selected among a population of 130 PKU subjects as harboring PKU mutations predicted as BH4 responsive and previously considered responsive to a cofactor challenge. They received a simple Phe (100 mg/kg) and 2 combined Phe (100 mg/kg) and BH4 (20 mg/kg) oral loading tests. Cofactor was administered either before or after the amino acid. The concentrations of Phe, tyrosine (Tyr), and biopterin were measured over 24 hours after loading. The comparative analysis of the loading tests showed that in all patients plasma Phe concentrations peaked within 3 hours, and fell within 24 hours by about 50% in benign, 20% in mild, and 15% in severe phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency regardless of BH4 administration. A consistent or moderate increase of plasma Tyr, again independent of the cofactor challenge, was observed only in the less severe forms of PAH deficiency. Mean blood biopterin concentration increased 6 times after simple Phe and 34 to 39 times after combined loading tests. The administration of BH4 does not alter Phe and Tyr metabolism in PKU patients. The clearance of plasma Phe after oral loading and, as well as Tyr production, is not related to cofactor challenge but to patient's phenotype. The assessment of BH4 responsiveness by the methods so far used is not reliable, and the occurrence of BH4-responsive forms of PKU still has to be definitely proven.",3 1
"Molecular and functional characterization of eight novel GAA mutations in Italian infants with Pompe disease. ||  || We characterized 29 unrelated patients presenting with the severe form of Pompe disease (Glycogen Storage Disease Type II, acid maltase deficiency) and identified 26 pathogenic mutations divided over 28 different genotypes. Among the eight new mutations, five were exonic point mutations (c.572A>G, c.1124G>T, c.1202A>G, c.1564C>G and c.1796C>A) leading to codon changes (p.Y191C, p.R375L, p.Q401R, p.P522A and p.S599Y); two were intronic point mutations (c.-32-3C>A and c.1636+5G>C) affecting mRNA processing; one was a single base deletion (c.742delC) generating a truncated protein (p.L248PfsX20). A comprehensive evaluation, based on different methodological approaches, confirmed the detrimental effect of the eight mutations on the protein and its function. Structural alterations potentially induced by the five missense mutations were also predicted through visual inspection of the atomic model of the GAA protein, in terms of both function and spatial orientation of specific residues as well as disturbance generated by amino acid substitutions. Although the remarkable heterogeneity of the mutational spectrum in Pompe disease was already known, our data demonstrate and confirm the power of molecular and functional analysis in predicting the natural course of Pompe disease.",1 4 0
"New and rare GJB2 alleles in patients with nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing impairment: a genotype/auditory phenotype correlation. || Alleles Connexin 26 Connexin 30 Connexins Female Gene Frequency Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Heterozygote Humans Male Phenotype Point Mutation || The aim of the study is to report the new and rare GJB2 variants identified in individuals with nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing impairment (HI) in a retrospective study based on 498 patients referred to the Otolaryngology and Medical Genetics Units of the Modena University Hospital, Italy, with the purpose of building new genotype/auditory phenotype correlations for the GJB2 gene. A total of eight variants identified in HI patients under study were considered rare for their frequency below 1% in the general population and in the HI databases. Of those, four (I20T, V95M, N206S, c.-22-2A>C) were in compound heterozygosity with known mutations resulting in a range of phenotypes from mild to profound, whereas four (W3R, C218Y, K221N, c.-22-6T>C) were found in simple heterozygosity (for those only in silico prediction of pathogenicity was possible due to the absence of a second GJB2 or GJB6 mutation). Based on patients' phenotype, reported frequency, and in silico prediction analysis, we suggest the prognostic value of eight rare and new GJB2 alleles, which may be of help to the clinician in counseling patients who carry such variants.",1
"Identification of SLC26A4 c.919-2A>G compound heterozygosity in hearing-impaired patients to improve genetic counseling. || DNA Primers Genetic Counseling Hearing Loss Heterozygote Humans Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Quality of Health Care Sulfate Transporters || Mutations in the SLC26A4 gene, which encodes the anion transporter, pendrin, are a major cause of autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) in some Asian populations. SLC26A4 c.919-2A>G (IVS7-2A>G) is the most common mutation in East Asian deaf populations. To provide a basis for improving the clinical diagnosis of deaf patients, we evaluated 80 patients with the SLC26A4 c.919-2A>G monoallelic mutation from 1065 hearing-impaired subjects and reported the occurrence of a second mutant allele in these patients. The occurrence of a second mutant allele in these 80 patients with a single c.919-2A>G mutation was investigated. Mutation screening was performed by bidirectional sequencing in SLC26A4 exons 2 to 6 and 9 to 21. We found that 47/80 patients carried another SLC26A4 c.919-2A>G compound mutation. The five most common mutations were: p.H723R, p.T410M, 15+5G>A (c.1705+5G>A), p.L676Q and p.N392Y. We found a Chinese-specific SLC26A4 mutation spectrum and an associated SLC26A4 contribution to deafness. Our study illustrates that mutation analysis of other SLC26A4 exons should be undertaken in deaf patients with a single heterozygous SLC26A4 mutation. Moreover, a model of compound heterozygosity may partially explain the disease phenotype.",1
"Usher's Syndrome Type II: A Comparative Study of Genetic Mutations and Vestibular System Evaluation. || Adolescent Adult Cross-Sectional Studies Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Humans Italy Male Middle Aged Mutation Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled Usher Syndromes Vestibular Function Tests || Objective Usher's syndrome type II (USH2) is characterized by moderate to profound congenital hearing loss, later onset of retinitis pigmentosa, and normal vestibular function. Recently, a study investigating the vestibular function of USH2 patients demonstrated a pathologic response to vestibular tests. In this cross-sectional study we performed vestibular tests of a group patients with genetic diagnosis of USH2 syndrome to demonstrate if vestibular damage is present in USH2 patients. Study Design Cross-sectional study. Setting Tertiary referral center. Subjects and Methods Mutated genes of 7 patients with a clinical diagnosis of USH2 were evaluated. Vestibular function was investigated by audiometry, Fitzgerald-Hallpike caloric vestibular testing, cervical vestibular evoked myogenic potentials (C-VEMPs), ocular vestibular evoked myogenic potentials (O-VEMPs), and video head impulse test (v-HIT). Results Genetic tests confirmed the USH2 diagnosis in 5 of 7 patients examined, with 1 patient reporting a unique mutation on genetic tests. Four (80%) of the 5 patients with a genetic diagnosis of USH2 showed pathological O-VEMPs. Two patients (40%) reported bilateral absent or abnormal values of C-VEMPs. The superior semicircular canal presented a significant deficit in 2 (40%) patients. The same 2 cases showed a pathologic response of the v-HIT of the horizontal semicircular canal. Finally, the posterior semicircular canal presented a significant deficit in 4 (40.0%) patients. Conclusion A vestibular evaluation with vestibular evoked myogenic potentials and v-HIT seems to identify latent damage to the vestibular receptors of USH2 patients.",1
"Juvenile-onset glycogen storage disease type II with novel mutations in acid alpha-glucosidase gene. || Adolescent Amino Acid Substitution Asian Continental Ancestry Group DNA Mutational Analysis Enzyme Activation Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Heterozygote Humans Male Mutation, Missense Penetrance Siblings alpha-Glucosidases || The authors describe two novel mutations of the acid alpha-glucosidase gene, P361L and R437C, which define the juvenile-onset glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII) in a 16-year-old Chinese patient. The asymptomatic 13-year-old brother of the proband is also a compound heterozygote of the two mutations. These results confirm that intrafamilial phenotypic variation of juvenile-onset GSDII is ethnically diverse and suggest the contribution of other genes to the phenotypic variability of GSDII.",1 0
"Molecular analysis and protein processing in late-onset Pompe disease patients with low levels of acid α-glucosidase activity. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Blotting, Western Child Enzyme Activation Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Middle Aged Mutation Protein Modification, Translational Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II, acid maltase deficiency) is caused by deficiency of lysosomal acid α-glucosidase (GAA). A few late-onset patients have been reported with skin fibroblast GAA activity levels of <2%. We measured GAA activity in skin fibroblasts from 101 patients with late-onset Pompe disease. Whenever possible, we performed Western blot analysis and correlated the results with GAA activity and GAA gene mutations. Thirteen patients (13%) had skin fibroblast GAA activity of <1% of normal. Although there was wide genetic heterogeneity, none of these patients carried the common late-onset mutation c.-32-13T > G. We performed Western blot on 11 patients with <1% GAA activity. All produced GAA protein that was at lower levels and/or was abnormally processed. There is no common mutation associated with <1% GAA activity in late-onset Pompe disease patients. Most patients produce unprocessed forms of GAA protein compared with patients with higher GAA activity.",3 1 4
"Spectrum of mutations in Lebanese patients with phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. || Alleles Child, Preschool Consanguinity Exons Female Genetic Association Studies Homozygote Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Lebanon Male Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Pilot Projects Polymorphism, Genetic || Phenylketonuria is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism resulting from phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. Genetic basis of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency has been reported in various European and Asian countries with few reports available in Arab populations of the Mediterranean region. This is the first pilot study describing phenotype and genotype of 23 Lebanese patients with phenylketonuria. 48% of the patients presented mainly with neurological signs at a mean age of 2 years 9 months, as newborn screening is not yet a nationwide policy. 56.5% of the patients had classical phenylketonuria. Thirteen different mutations were identified: splice site 52%, frameshift 31%, and missense 17% with no nonsense mutations. IVS10-11G>A was found mainly in Christians at high relative frequency whereas Muslims carried the G352fs and R261Q mutations. A rare splice mutation IVS7+1G>T, not described before, was identified in the homozygous state in one family with moderate phenylketonuria phenotype. Genotype-phenotype correlation using Guldberg arbitrary value method showed high consistency between predicted and observed phenotypes. Calculated homozygosity rate was 0.07 indicating the genetic heterogeneity in our patients. Our findings underline the admixture of different ethnicities and religions in Lebanon that might help tracing back the PAH gene flux history across the Mediterranean region.",1
"A detailed clinical and molecular survey of subjects with nonsyndromic USH2A retinopathy reveals an allelic hierarchy of disease-causing variants. || Adult Aged Alleles DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Genetic Testing Genotype Humans Introns Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Retinal Diseases Retinitis Pigmentosa Surveys and Questionnaires Usher Syndromes || Defects in USH2A cause both isolated retinal disease and Usher syndrome (ie, retinal disease and deafness). To gain insights into isolated/nonsyndromic USH2A retinopathy, we screened USH2A in 186 probands with recessive retinal disease and no hearing complaint in childhood (discovery cohort) and in 84 probands with recessive retinal disease (replication cohort). Detailed phenotyping, including retinal imaging and audiological assessment, was performed in individuals with two likely disease-causing USH2A variants. Further genetic testing, including screening for a deep-intronic disease-causing variant and large deletions/duplications, was performed in those with one likely disease-causing change. Overall, 23 of 186 probands (discovery cohort) were found to harbour two likely disease-causing variants in USH2A. Some of these variants were predominantly associated with nonsyndromic retinal degeneration ('retinal disease-specific'); these included the common c.2276 G>T, p.(Cys759Phe) mutation and five additional variants: c.2802 T>G, p.(Cys934Trp); c.10073 G>A, p.(Cys3358Tyr); c.11156 G>A, p.(Arg3719His); c.12295-3 T>A; and c.12575 G>A, p.(Arg4192His). An allelic hierarchy was observed in the discovery cohort and confirmed in the replication cohort. In nonsyndromic USH2A disease, retinopathy was consistent with retinitis pigmentosa and the audiological phenotype was variable. USH2A retinopathy is a common cause of nonsyndromic recessive retinal degeneration and has a different mutational spectrum to that observed in Usher syndrome. The following model is proposed: the presence of at least one 'retinal disease-specific' USH2A allele in a patient with USH2A-related disease results in the preservation of normal hearing. Careful genotype-phenotype studies such as this will become increasingly important, especially now that high-throughput sequencing is widely used in the clinical setting.",1 4
"A multicenter study of the frequency and distribution of GJB2 and GJB6 mutations in a large North American cohort. ||  || The aim of the study was to determine the actual GJB2 and GJB6 mutation frequencies in North America after several years of generalized testing for autosomal recessive nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss to help guide diagnostic testing algorithms, especially in light of molecular diagnostic follow-up to universal newborn hearing screening. Mutation types, frequencies, ethnic distributions, and genotype-phenotype correlations for GJB2 and GJB6 were assessed in a very large North American cohort. GJB2 variants were identified in 1796 (24.3%) of the 7401 individuals examined, with 399 (5.4%) homozygous and 429 (5.8%) compound heterozygous. GJB6 deletion testing was performed in 12.0% (888/7401) of all cases. The >300-kb deletion was identified in only nine individuals (1.0%), all of whom were compound heterozygous for mutations in GJB2 and GJB6. Among a total of 139 GJB2 variants identified, 53 (38.1%) were previously unreported, presumably representing novel pathogenic or benign variants. The frequency and distribution of sequence changes in GJB2 and GJB6 in North America differ from those previously reported, suggesting a considerable role for loci other than GJB2 and GJB6 in the etiology of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss, with minimal prevalence of the GJB6 deletion.",1 4
"Glycogen storage disease: clinical, biochemical, and molecular heterogeneity. || Glycogen Storage Disease Humans || Glycogen storage diseases (GSDs) are characterized by abnormal inherited glycogen metabolism in the liver, muscle, and brain and divided into types 0 to X. GSD type I, glucose 6-phosphatase system, has types Ia, Ib, Ic, and Id, glucose 6-phosphatase, glucose 6-phosphate translocase, pyrophosphate translocase, and glucose translocase deficiencies, respectively. GSD type II is caused by defective lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (GAA), subdivided into 4 onset forms. GSD type III, amylo-1,6-glucosidase deficiency, is subdivided into 6 forms. GSD type IV, Andersen disease or amylopectinosis, is caused by deficiency of the glycogen-branching enzyme in numerous forms. GSD type V, McArdle disease or muscle phosphorylase deficiency, is divided into 2 forms. GSD type VI is characterized by liver phosphorylase deficiency. GSD type VII, phosphofructokinase deficiency, has 2 subtypes. GSD types VIa, VIII, IX, or X are supposedly caused by tissue-specific phosphorylase kinase deficiency. GSD type 0, glycogen synthase deficiency, is divided into 2 subtypes.",1
"Pompe disease in Austria: clinical, genetic and epidemiological aspects. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Austria Child Delayed Diagnosis Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Follow-Up Studies Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Retrospective Studies Vital Capacity alpha-Glucosidases || In this study, we performed a survey of infantile and late-onset Pompe disease (IOPD and LOPD) in Austria. Paediatric and neuromuscular centres were contacted to provide a set of anonymized clinical and genetic data of patients with IOPD and LOPD. The number of patients receiving enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) was obtained from the pharmaceutical company providing alglucosidase alfa. We found 25 patients in 24 families, 4 IOPD and 21 LOPD with a resulting prevalence of 1:350,914. The most frequent clinical manifestation in LOPD was a lower limb-girdle phenotype combined with axial weakness. Three patients were clinically pauci- or asymptomatic and were diagnosed because of persistent hyperCKemia. Diagnostic delay in LOPD was 7.4 ± 9.7 years. The most common mutation was c.-32-13T > G. All IOPD and 17 symptomatic LOPD patients are receiving ERT. Standardized follow-up was only available in six LOPD patients for the 6-min walk test (6minWT) and in ten for the forced vital capacity (FVC). Mean FVC did not decline (before ERT; 63.6 ± 39.7%; last evaluation during ERT: 61.9 ± 26.9%; P = 0.5) while there was a trend to decline in the mean distance covered by the 6minWT (before ERT: 373.5 ± 117.9 m; last evaluation during ERT: 308.5 ± 120.8 m; P = 0.077). The study shows a lower prevalence of Pompe disease in Austria than in other European countries and corroborates a limb-girdle phenotype with axial weakness as the most common clinical presentation, although asymptomatic hyperCKemia may be the first indication of LOPD.",1
"Respiratory function in late-onset Pompe disease patients receiving long-term enzyme replacement therapy for more than 48 months. || Adult Aged Blood Gas Analysis Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Follow-Up Studies Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Long-Term Care Lung Volume Measurements Male Middle Aged Respiratory Function Tests || Respiratory impairment is the most important prognostic factor in patients with adult-onset Pompe disease. The effect of long-term enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) on pulmonary function remains unclear.Respiratory parameters (vital capacity (VCmax); forced expiratory volume (FEV1); peak expiratory flow (PEF); and blood gas analysis) were monitored every 6 months during a treatment period of 48-77 months of ERT in six patients with genetically and biochemically confirmed adult-onset Pompe disease. Postural drop of VCmax from sitting to supine position, maximal inspiratory muscle pressure (PImax), mouth occlusion pressure after 100 ms (P0.1), and peak cough flow (PCF) were measured over a period of 12 months. Mean change to baseline were +8.8 % points for ΔVCmax, +6.2 % points for ΔFEV1, and +6.6 % points for ΔPEF after 48 months of ERT. In one patient, a decrease of respiratory parameters with later stabilization was observed under ERT until month 42, but noninvasive ventilation (NIV) had to be initiated due to nocturnal desaturation. In the final 12 months period, progressive diaphragm weakness was detected in 3/6 patients (median change in VC% drop +8 %).ERT seems to stabilize pulmonary function and may delay the requirement for ventilation in patients with late-onset Pompe disease.",1
"Pendred's syndrome and non-syndromic DFNB4 deafness associated with the homozygous T410M mutation in the SLC26A4 gene in siblings. || Biological Transport Child Chromosomes, Human, Pair 7 DNA Mutational Analysis Deafness Female Genotype Goiter Humans Male Membrane Transport Proteins Middle Aged Pedigree Phenotype Sulfate Transporters Sulfates Syndrome || ",2 1 3
"Tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness in phenylketonuria: prediction with the 48-hour loading test and genotype. || Adolescent Adult Biopterin Child Female Genotype Humans Male Mutation Phenylketonurias Young Adult || How to efficiently diagnose tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) responsiveness in patients with phenylketonuria remains unclear. This study investigated the positive predictive value (PPV) of the 48-hour BH4 loading test and the additional value of genotype. Data of the 48-hour BH4 loading test (20 mg BH4/kg/day) were collected at six Dutch university hospitals. Patients with ≥30% phenylalanine reduction at ≥1 time points during the 48 hours (potential responders) were invited for the BH4 extension phase, designed to establish true-positive BH4 responsiveness. This is defined as long-term ≥30% reduction in mean phenylalanine concentration and/or ≥4 g/day and/or ≥50% increase of natural protein intake. Genotype was collected if available. 177/183 patients successfully completed the 48-hour BH4 loading test. 80/177 were potential responders and 67/80 completed the BH4 extension phase. In 58/67 true-positive BH4 responsiveness was confirmed (PPV 87%). The genotype was available for 120/177 patients. 41/44 patients with ≥1 mutation associated with long-term BH4 responsiveness showed potential BH4 responsiveness in the 48-hour test and 34/41 completed the BH4 extension phase. In 33/34 true-positive BH4 responsiveness was confirmed. 4/40 patients with two known putative null mutations were potential responders; 2/4 performed the BH4 extension phase but showed no true-positive BH4 responsiveness. The 48-hour BH4 loading test in combination with a classified genotype is a good parameter in predicting true-positive BH4 responsiveness. We propose assessing genotype first, particularly in the neonatal period. Patients with two known putative null mutations can be excluded from BH4 testing.",3 1
"Chaperone-like therapy with tetrahydrobiopterin in clinical trials for phenylketonuria: is genotype a predictor of response? ||  || Prospectively enrolled phenylketonuria patients (n=485) participated in an international Phase II clinical trial to identify the prevalence of a therapeutic response to daily doses of sapropterin dihydrochloride (sapropterin, KUVAN(®)). Responsive patients were then enrolled in two subsequent Phase III clinical trials to examine safety, ability to reduce blood Phenylalanine levels, dosage (5-20 mg/kg/day) and response, and bioavailability of sapropterin. We combined phenotypic findings in the Phase II and III clinical trials to classify study-related responsiveness associated with specific alleles and genotypes identified in the patients. We found that 17% of patients showed a response to sapropterin. The patients harbored 245 different genotypes derived from 122 different alleles, among which ten alleles were newly discovered. Only 16.3% of the genotypes clearly conferred a sapropterin-responsive phenotype. Among the different PAH alleles, only 5% conferred a responsive phenotype. The responsive alleles were largely but not solely missense mutations known to or likely to cause misfolding of the PAH subunit. However, the metabolic response was not robustly predictable from the PAH genotypes, based on the study design adopted for these clinical trials, and accordingly it seems prudent to test each person for this phenotype with a standardized protocol.",3 1
"Clinical Laboratory Experience of Blood CRIM Testing in Infantile Pompe Disease. ||  || Cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM) status is an important prognostic factor in patients with infantile Pompe disease (IPD) being treated with enzyme replacement therapy. Western blot analysis of cultured skin fibroblast lysates has been the gold standard for determining CRIM status. Here, we evaluated CRIM status using peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) protein. For 6 of 33 patients (18%) CRIM status determination using PBMC was either indeterminate or discordant with GAA genotype or fibroblast CRIM analysis results. While the use of PBMCs for CRIM determination has the advantage of a faster turnaround time, further evaluation is needed to ensure the accuracy of CRIM results.",1
"A case of childhood Pompe disease demonstrating phenotypic variability of p.Asp645Asn. || Amino Acid Substitution Animals Asparagine Aspartic Acid Blotting, Western COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops DNA Mutational Analysis Echocardiography, Three-Dimensional Fibroblasts Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Muscles Mutation Phenotype Transfection alpha-Glucosidases || A six-year-old child presented at 8 months of age with proximal muscle weakness and mild cardiac hypertrophy. Some alpha-glucosidase activity was detected in muscle but not in fibroblasts. As none of the two pathogenic mutations, [c.1933G>A]+[c.2702T>A] (Asp645Asn/Leu901Gln), led to detectable alpha-glucosidase activity upon expression in COS cells, the phenotype of the patient remained unexplained. A functionally comparable set of mutations, Asp645Asn/insGnt2243, was reported previously to cause classic infantile Pompe disease [Biochem Biophys Res Commun 244 (1998) 921]. We conclude that secondary genetic or environmental factors can be decisive for the phenotypic outcome of classic infantile versus childhood Pompe disease, when the acid alpha-glucosidase activity is extremely low.",1 0
"A novel acid alpha-glucosidase mutation identified in a Pakistani family with glycogen storage disease type II. ||  || A novel mutation, C118T, in exon 2 of the acid alpha-glucosidase gene has been found in an infant with glycogen storage disease type II. This mutation is predicted to result in protein truncation. The phenotype was that of the severe infantile form of the disorder with lack of motor development, but with eye regard, social smile and vocalization. The parents were heterozygous for C118T and belong to an Islamic community opposed to termination of pregnancy. As the C118T mutation results in the loss of one of two AvaI sites present in an informative PCR product, reliable premarriage carrier detection became possible and was acceptable to the members of this extended family.",1
"New evidence for assessing tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) responsiveness. || Adolescent Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Female Follow-Up Studies Genotype Humans Infant Male Phenylalanine Phenylketonurias Pilot Projects Reproducibility of Results Spain Treatment Outcome Young Adult || To evaluate the protocol we propose for detecting BH(4)-responsive patients and the possibility of delimiting more precisely the population to be tested. We recruited 102 phenylketonuric patients on a phenylalanine (Phe)-restricted diet. The initial stage of the protocol was a 24-h BH(4) loading test involving Phe loading and subsequent ingestion of the cofactor, a 50% fall in blood Phe levels being considered a positive response. The non-responders at this stage then completed a one-week therapeutic test combining BH(4) administration and daily protein intake meeting recommended dietary allowances, to assess whether the 24-h test had detected all responders. The 24-h test detected almost all BH(4) responders (30.3% of the 99 patients included in the analysis), with just two patients (2.0%) subsequently responding positively to the therapeutic test. The 24-h test did not give any false positive results. The 24-h BH(4) loading test is clinically useful for screening phenylketonuric patients. Specifically, 95% of patients with Phe levels <700 μmol/L, and none with Phe levels >1500 μmol/L were BH(4)-responsive. Given these results, we conclude that patients with Phe levels<700 μmol/L or>1500 μmol/L probably do not need to be tested, prioritising the identification of BH(4)-responsiveness among individuals with intermediate Phe concentrations, between the aforementioned values. Additionally, our results suggest that the therapeutic test only needs to be performed in cases where the reduction in blood Phe levels after cofactor administration is within the range 40%-50%.",3 1
"Comprehensive screening of the USH2A gene in Usher syndrome type II and non-syndromic recessive retinitis pigmentosa. || Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Genetic Testing Hearing Loss Humans Male Mutation Pedigree Retinitis Pigmentosa Syndrome || A screen of the entire coding region of the USH2A gene in 129 unrelated patients with Usher syndrome type II (USH2) and in 146 unrelated patients with non-syndromic autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (ARRP) uncovered 54 different sequence variations, including 18 likely pathogenic mutations (13 frameshift, three nonsense, and two missense), 12 changes of uncertain pathogenicity (11 missense changes and one in-frame deletion), and 24 non-pathogenic rare variants or polymorphisms. Of the 18 likely pathogenic mutations, nine were novel. Among the USH2 patients, 50 (39%) had one or two likely pathogenic mutations. The most common mutant allele in USH2 patients was E767fs, which was found in 29 patients, including one homozygote. Among the ARRP patients, we found 17 (12%) with one or two likely pathogenic mutations. The most common mutant allele in ARRP patients was C759F and it was found in 10 patients. The C759F allele was also found in two USH2 patients; in neither of them was a change in the other allele found. The second most common mutant allele in both patient groups was L1447fs (found in 6/50 USH2 patients and 6/17 ARRP patients). Of the 50+17=67 patients with identified USH2A mutations, only one mutation in one allele was found in 41+12=53 (79%); the reason for the high proportion of patients with only one identified mutation is obscure. Our results indicate that USH2A mutations are found in about 7% of all cases of RP in North America, a frequency similar to the RPGR gene (8%) and the rhodopsin gene (10%).",3 1 4
"Tetrahydrobiopterin sensitivity in German patients with mild phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. ||  || We report the results of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) loading tests in 10 German patients with mild phenylketonuria. A significant decline of phenylalanine values after application of BH4 was observed in all but one patients. Molecular genetic analyses revealed a range of different PAH gene mutations. Re-testing of one patient previously reported as non-responsive to BH4 loading showed a moderate response with a higher dose of BH4. Nevertheless, there appear to be kinetic differences in phenylalanine hydroxylation in patients with the same genotype. Non-responsiveness to 20 mg/kg BH4 was observed only in a single patient who was compound heterozygous for the novel mutation R176P (c.527G>C) and the common null-mutation P281L. In summary, our data are in line with recent reports indicating that BH4 sensitivity is a normal feature of most mild forms of PAH deficiency but may be influenced by other factors.",1
"A silent mutation induces exon skipping in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in phenylketonuria. || Base Sequence Exons Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias RNA, Messenger Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Transfection Tumor Cells, Cultured || An A-->T substitution in cDNA nucleotide 1197 (c.1197A/T) of the human phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene has been regarded as a silent mutation, because both the wild-type (GUA) and the mutant (GUU) alleles encode a valine residue at codon 399 (V399 V). The nucleotide c.1197 is located at the 3'-end of exon 11at position -3 of the exon-intron junction. To explore whether the substitution exerts any effects on the processing of the PAH mRNA, illegitimate PAH transcripts from lymphoblast cultures of a phenylketonuria (PKU) patient heterozygous for c.1197A/T were analyzed by the polymerase chain reaction following reverse-transcription (RT-PCR). mRNAs with an exon 11 deletion were revealed. Furthermore, by using an R408 W mutation in the paternal allele as a marker, sequence analysis of the RT-PCR products indicates that virtually all PAH transcripts from the maternal allele with the c. 1197A/T substitution do not contain exon 11. To address whether this substitution is the main determinant for exon skipping, PAH minigenes with or without the substitution were constructed and transfected to a human hepatoma cell line. Analysis of the transcription products by S1 nuclease mapping clearly indicated that such exon 11 skipping was directly associated with the c.1197A/T substitution. Thus, this study demonstrates that the c.1197A/T substitution in the PAH gene is not just a neutral polymorphism but a mutation that induces post-transcriptional skipping of exon 11 leading to a PKU phenotype.",3 1 0
"Immune Modulation Therapy in a CRIM-Positive and IgG Antibody-Positive Infant with Pompe Disease Treated with Alglucosidase Alfa: A Case Report. ||  || Pompe disease is characterized by deficiency or absence of activity of the lysosomal enzyme acid alpha-glucosidase. As a result of ineffective metabolism, glycogen progressively accumulates in muscle tissues. Patients with an aggressive classic infantile-onset form generally rapidly die of cardiorespiratory failure. A cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM)-negative status is predictive of high anti-alglucosidase alfa antibody titers and usually a poor clinical outcome of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). CRIM-positive patients can also develop robust antibody titers complicating therapeutic management.We successfully used an immune modulation therapy (IMT) protocol in a CRIM-positive infantile-onset patient with Pompe disease in whom infusions had to be temporarily discontinued because of safety concerns despite administration of pre-infusion medication. Prior to discontinuation, she had shown signs of clinical deterioration and continuous ventilation support through a tracheostomy was required. She was found to be positive for anti-alglucosidase alfa antibodies (1:6,400). IMT (rituximab, methotrexate and intravenous gamma globulin) was started, ERT was safely reintroduced during the IMT induction phase and, subsequently, the enzyme dose was increased, all without any complications. Antibodies disappeared, IMT was tapered and discontinued, and cadiomyopathy steadily improved. During 1 year of follow-up, she remained ventilator dependent and no gains in motor skills were noticed; motor functions will be closely monitored during sustained ERT.Although the reversal of clinical decline in our CRIM-positive and antibody-positive infant with Pompe disease cannot be solely attributed to IMT, our experiences with this protocol may be helpful to other physicians encountering comparable therapeutic dilemmas.",3 1
"Expanding the clinical spectrum of late-onset Pompe disease: dilated arteriopathy involving the thoracic aorta, a novel vascular phenotype uncovered. || Adult Aorta, Thoracic Aortic Diseases Child, Preschool Dilatation, Pathologic Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Middle Aged Phenotype || Cerebro-vascular arteriopathy has been reported in late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD). Evidence of increased aortic stiffness in some patients and smooth muscle involvement in LOPD raises the possibility of aortic involvement. Our aim was to determine if aortic arteriopathy may be a complication of LOPD. One patient with LOPD was diagnosed with aortic dilatation at Duke Metabolic clinic, 4 others were diagnosed at University of Mainz, Germany, where chest X-ray and echocardiography are routinely done for patients. Other causes of aortic vascular disease were assessed. We report evidence of dilated arteriopathy involving primarily the ascending thoracic aorta in 5 females with late-onset Pompe disease. One patient had a bicuspid aortic valve and developed dissection. Another patient with juvenile onset disease had both thoracic and basilar artery aneurysms. Aneurysmal dilatation of the thoracic aorta is an underreported vascular complication of LOPD, probably due to the same pathological process that occurs in the brain. Chest X-ray together with echocardiography should be incorporated as initial screening tools for aortic aneurysms in patients with LOPD. When ectasia is suspected, or the ascending aorta is not visualized, contrast- mediated thoracic CT or MRA may be necessary. Large-scale studies are warranted to determine the prevalence and extent of aortic vascular involvement.",3 1 4
"Two novel PAH gene mutations detected in Italian phenylketonuric patients. || Child Female Humans Italy Male Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic || We report the identification by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and sequence analysis of two new phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene mutations (IVS4nt-2 and N207S) in single chromosomes of two unrelated Italian phenylketonuric (PKU) patients. Interestingly, mutation Y204C, found on the second mutant allele of family F1, has been previously detected in Chinese patients. Haplotype analysis showed that the latter mutation is linked to the same haplotype (H4) in both Chinese and Italian patients, suggesting a common origin. In vivo assessment of mutation severity indicates that N207S is associated with classic PKU. The identification of these two new mutations further extends the remarkable heterogeneity of the PAH locus in the Italian population.",3 1
"The mutation spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene and associated haplotypes reveal ethnic heterogeneity in the Taiwanese population. || Ethnic Groups Gene Frequency Genetic Association Studies Genetic Heterogeneity Haplotypes Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Taiwan || Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency is responsible for most cases of phenylketonuria (PKU). In this study of the PAH mutation spectrum in the Taiwanese population, 139 alleles were identified including 34 different mutations. The V190G, Q267R and F392I mutations are first reported in this study. The most common mutations, R241C, R408Q and Ex6-96A>G, account for 23.2%, 12.0% and 9.2%, of the mutant alleles, respectively. Haplotype analysis shows that R241C and Ex6-96A>G are exclusively associated with haplotype 4.3 to suggest founder effects. On the other hand, R408Q is found on two distinct haplotypes suggesting recurrent mutations. The spectrum of PAH mutations in Taiwan shows various links to those of other Asian regions, yet remarkable differences exist. Notably, R408Q, E286K and -4173_-407del, accounting for 21% of all mutant alleles in Taiwan, are very rare or are undetected among PKU cohorts of other Asian regions to suggest local founder effects. Moreover, the low homozygosity value of 0.092 hints at a high degree of ethnic heterogeneity within the Taiwanese population. Our study of PAH mutation spectrum and the associated haplotypes is useful for subsequent study on the origin and migration pattern via Taiwan, an island at the historical crossroad of migration of ancient populations.",3 1 0
"Comparison of dysferlin expression in human skeletal muscle with that in monocytes for the diagnosis of dysferlin myopathy. || Adult Biopsy DNA Mutational Analysis Dysferlin Female Humans Lipopolysaccharide Receptors Male Membrane Proteins Monocytes Muscle Proteins Muscle, Skeletal Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle Mutation Solubility || Dysferlinopathies are caused by mutations in the dysferlin gene (DYSF). Diagnosis is complex due to the high clinical variability of the disease and because dysferlin expression in the muscle biopsy may be secondarily reduced due to a primary defect in some other gene. Dysferlin is also expressed in peripheral blood monocytes (PBM). Studying dysferlin in monocytes is used for the diagnosis of dysferlin myopathies. The aim of the study was to determine whether dysferlin expression in PBM correlates with that in skeletal muscle. Using western-blot (WB) we quantified dysferlin expression in PBM from 21 pathological controls with other myopathies in whom mutations in DYSF were excluded and from 17 patients who had dysferlinopathy and two mutations in DYSF. Results were compared with protein expression in muscle by WB and immunohistochemistry (IH). We found a good correlation between skeletal muscle and monocytes using WB. However, IH results were misleading because abnormal expression of dysferlin was also observed in 13/21 pathological controls. The analysis of dysferlin protein expression in PBM is helpful when: 1) the skeletal muscle IH pattern is abnormal or 2) when muscle WB can not be performed either because muscle sample is lacking or insufficient or because the muscle biopsy is taken from a muscle at an end-stage and it mainly consists of fat and fibrotic tissue.",1
"Identification of the first deletion-insertion involving the complete structure of GAA gene and part of CCDC40 gene mediated by an Alu element. || Alu Elements Base Sequence European Continental Ancestry Group Gene Deletion Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genome, Human Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant, Newborn Male Microarray Analysis Molecular Sequence Data Nucleic Acid Amplification Techniques Proteins Respiratory Insufficiency Sequence Analysis, DNA Spain alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an uncommon autosomal recessive glycogen storage disorder caused by deficiency of acid α-glucosidase. Classic infantile form triggers severe cardiomyopathy, hypotonia, and respiratory failure, leading to death within the first two years of life. The majority of patients with Pompe disease have been reported to have point mutations in the GAA gene. We report the first complex deletion-insertion encompassing the complete structure of GAA gene and a large fragment of the gene CCDC40 in a patient with very severe form of Pompe disease. Sequencing analysis of breakpoints allowed us to determine the potential implication of an Alu repeat in the pathogenic mechanism. We suggest that molecular strategy of Pompe disease should include systematic analysis of large rearrangements.",1
"Effects of enzyme replacement therapy on five patients with advanced late-onset glycogen storage disease type II: a 2-year follow-up study. ||  || We examined the efficacy of 2-year enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) using recombinant human α-glucosidase (GAA; Myozyme®) in five long-term ventilator-dependent adults and aged patients with advanced, late-onset glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII, also known as Pompe disease). Although all patients had advanced respiratory failure and were ventilator-dependent for more than 6 years, four showed obvious improvements in muscle strength, pulmonary function, and activities of daily living after ERT. Improvement in each parameter was more prominent in the first year than in the second year. Values in the second year were still significantly better than those at study entry and indicate stabilization in the clinical status of all patients. These results suggest that ERT continues to be effective in the second year of treatment even in patients suffering from advanced late-onset GSDII disease with severe respiratory failure.",1
"Mutational and phenotypical spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Denmark. || Alleles Denmark Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Humans Male Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || We describe the genotypes of the complete cohort, from 1967 to 2014, of phenylketonuria (PKU) patients in Denmark, in total 376 patients. A total of 752 independent alleles were investigated. Mutations were identified on 744 PKU alleles (98.9%). In total, 82 different mutations were present in the cohort. The most frequent mutation c.1315+1G>A (IVS12+1G>A) was found on 25.80% of the 744 alleles. Other very frequent mutations were c.1222C>T (p.R408W) (16.93%) and c.1241A>G (p.Y414C) (11.15%). Among the identified mutations, five mutations; c.532G>A (p.E178K), c.730C>T (p.P244S), c.925G>A (p.A309T), c.1228T>A (p.F410I), and c.1199+4A>G (IVS11+4A>G) have not been reported previously. The metabolic phenotypes of PKU are classified into four categories; 'classical PKU', 'moderate PKU', 'mild PKU' and 'mild hyperphenylalaninemia'. In this study, we assigned the phenotypic outcome of three of the five novel mutations and furthermore six not previously classified mutations to one of the four PKU categories.",3 1 0
"A phenylalanine hydroxylase amino acid polymorphism with implications for molecular diagnostics. || African Continental Ancestry Group Alleles Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Dose-Response Relationship, Drug Escherichia coli Exons Family Health Humans Kinetics Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Recombinant Proteins || Mutations in the gene encoding phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH, EC 1.14.16.1) are associated with various degrees of hyperphenylalaninemia, including classical phenylketonuria (PKU). We examined the PAH gene in a Brazilian PKU family of African origin and identified three missense variants, R252W (c.754C --> T), K274E (c.820A --> G), and I318T (c.953T --> C), the two latter of which were transmitted in cis. Expression analyses in two different in vitro systems showed that I318T is associated with profoundly decreased enzyme activity, whereas the enzyme activity of K274E is indistinguishable from that of the wild-type protein. Detailed kinetic analyses of PAH expressed in E. coli showed that the K274E mutant protein has kinetic properties similar to that of the wild-type protein. Population studies have suggested that the K274E variant occurs on approximately 4% of African-American PAH alleles, whereas the neonatal screening incidence of PKU among African Americans is only 1:100,000. This is to our knowledge the first demonstration of a PAH missense variant with no apparent association to PAH deficiency. Awareness of this common variant may be helpful to laboratories that perform molecular diagnosis of PAH deficiency in populations of African origin.",3 1 0
"Molecular pathology and enzyme processing in various phenotypes of acid maltase deficiency. || Adult Aged Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Fluorometry Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Golgi Apparatus Humans Infant Lymphocytes Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 1 Lysosomes Male Middle Aged Molecular Weight Muscle, Skeletal Phenotype alpha-Glucosidases || To examine at molecular, biochemical, and muscle pathology level the striking clinical heterogeneity resulting from acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency. We investigated 23 patients with infantile-onset or late-onset glycogen storage disease type II by enzyme activity, protein expression by immunoblotting, GAA gene mutations, and muscle pathology including immunolabeling for Golgi and sarcolemmal proteins. The enzyme activity was absent or minimal in infantile-onset cases and variably reduced in late-onset patients. Genotype-phenotype correlation (seven novel mutations were found) showed that most late-onset patients had the heterozygous IVS1 leaky splicing mutation (one patient was homozygous), but the course of the disease was often difficult to predict on the basis of the mutations alone. All patients showed an abnormal pattern of enzyme protein processing, with increased amounts of the inactive forms and very low or absent amounts of the mature forms. The molecular weight of the mature and the intermediate forms appeared higher in patients' samples than in the control muscle. We observed a Golgi proliferation in muscle fibers possibly caused by the retention of inactive forms of enzyme protein that cannot be correctly targeted from Golgi to lysosomes. The vacuolar membranes expressed sarcolemmal proteins in late-onset but not in infantile-onset patients, suggesting an extensive autophagy and vacuolar membrane remodeling in late-onset patients. The different protein molecular weight between patients and controls could be due to an excessive sialylation of mutant enzyme: this might be possibly caused by a delayed transport and longer transit of the inactive proteins in the Golgi apparatus.",3 1
"Mutation profiles of phenylketonuria in Quebec populations: evidence of stratification and novel mutations. ||  || Independent phenylketonuria (PKU) chromosomes (n = 109) representing 80% of a proband cohort in Quebec province carry 18 different identified mutations in 20 different mutation/haplotype combinations. The study reported here, the third in a series on Quebec populations, was done in the Montreal region and predominantly on French Canadians. It has identified three novel mutations (A309D, D338Y, and 1054/1055delG[352fs]) and one unusual mutation/RFLP haplotype combination (E280K on Hp 2). The relative frequencies and distribution of PKU mutations were then compared in three regions and population subsets (eastern Quebec, French Canadian; western Quebec, French Canadian; and Montreal, non-French Canadian). The distributions of the prevalent and rare mutations are nonrandom and provide evidence for genetic stratification. The latter and the presence of eight unusual mutation/haplotype combinations in Quebec families with European ancestries (the aforementioned four and M1V, I65T, S349P, and R408W on Hp 1) corroborate demographic and anthropologic evidence, from elsewhere, for different origins of French Canadians in eastern and western Quebec.",3 1
"Phenylalanine hydroxylase gene mutations in phenylketonuria patients from India: identification of novel mutations that affect PAH RNA. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Female Humans Male Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias RNA Splice Sites Sequence Deletion || Analysis of seven Indian phenylketonuria families has revealed four novel mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene; two affected consensus splice sequence and the 3' UTR, respectively, while the other two were single base insertion and deletion mutations, respectively. A novel 3' splice site mutation c.168-2A>G resulted in the activation of a cryptic 3' splice site that generated a premature termination codon leading to very low levels of the mutant transcript, probably due to activation of the nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) pathway. This is probably the first report of PKU caused by the activation of NMD.",3 1
"[Clinical, biomedical , neurological and molecular study of 11 patients with new mutations in PAH gene]. ||  || PKU is an autosomal recessive disorder. There is a broad spectrum phenotype which depends mainly on residual enzymatic activity and also on other factors such as modifying genes and non-genetic factors. This fact makes us consider that a multidisciplinary study of these patients is necessary to improve knowledge of the condition. To establish phenotype-genotype correlation and classify nine new mutations according to severity. We evaluated the clinical data obtained from a multidisciplinary trial of 11 patients with PKU/HPA who presented with nine new mutations (P275S, P279fsdelC, V388delTG, N61/I62/T63fsdel5bp, P281S, P362T, H1OOR, I164V and Y168H) identified during a molecular study of the PAH gene done in Catalonia (Spain). In our patients the genotype is correlated with the biochemical phenotype whereas the cognitive phenotype depends on determining factors such as early diagnosis and diet. Therefore, although PKU may be considered to be a complex characteristic, the mutations in the PAH gene are the main determining factor of the metabolic phenotype of PKU. A multidisciplinary study is the best way to understand and control these patients.",3 1
"Molecular analysis of SLC26A4 gene in patients with nonsyndromic hearing loss and EVA: identification of two novel mutations in Brazilian patients. || Adolescent Adult Brazil Child Child, Preschool Connexins Female Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Mass Screening Membrane Transport Proteins Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Sequence Analysis, DNA Sulfate Transporters Young Adult || The SLC26A4 gene has been described as the second gene involved in most cases of sensorineural non-syndromic hearing loss, since the first is the GJB2 gene. Recessive mutations in the SLC26A4 gene encoding pendrin, an anion transporter, are responsible for non-syndromic hearing loss associated with an enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA) and Pendred syndrome, which causes early hearing loss and affects the thyroid gland. Typically, the hearing loss is profound and prelingual. However, in some individuals, hearing impairment may develop later in childhood and then progress. Over 200 different SLC26A4 mutations have been reported, with each ethnic population having its own distinctive mutant allele series including a few prevalent founder mutations. Perform the screening of the 20 coding exons of SLC26A4 gene in Brazilian deaf individuals with EVA. Among the 23 unrelated non-syndromic hearing loss Brazilian patients with EVA, in whom no deafness-causing mutations of the GJB2 gene, the direct sequencing was performed to screen the 20 exons and their flanking regions of the SLC26A4 gene. The sequencing results revealed 9 cases (39%) carrying 13 different SLC26A4 mutations, including 11 known mutations (279delT, V138F, T193I, IVS8+1G>A, T410M, Q413R, R409H, L445W, IVS15+5G>A, V609G, and R776C) and 2 novel mutation (G149R and P142L). The SLC26A4 mutations have a high carrying rate in non-syndromic hearing loss Brazilian patients. The identification of a disease-causing mutation can be used to establish a genotypic diagnosis and provide important information to the patients and their families.",3 1
"Functional assessment of allelic variants in the SLC26A4 gene involved in Pendred syndrome and nonsyndromic EVA. || Alleles Amino Acid Sequence Animals Cell Line Cohort Studies Genes, Recessive Genotype Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Membrane Transport Proteins Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Open Reading Frames Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Sequence Homology, Amino Acid Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Vestibular Aqueduct || Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by sensorineural hearing loss, with malformations of the inner ear, ranging from enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA) to Mondini malformation, and deficient iodide organification in the thyroid gland. Nonsyndromic EVA (ns-EVA) is a separate type of sensorineural hearing loss showing normal thyroid function. Both Pendred syndrome and ns-EVA seem to be linked to the malfunction of pendrin (SLC26A4), a membrane transporter able to exchange anions between the cytosol and extracellular fluid. In the past, the pathogenicity of SLC26A4 missense mutations were assumed if the mutations fulfilled two criteria: low incidence of the mutation in the control population and substitution of evolutionary conserved amino acids. Here we show that these criteria are insufficient to make meaningful predictions about the effect of these SLC26A4 variants on the pendrin-induced ion transport. Furthermore, we functionally characterized 10 missense mutations within the SLC26A4 ORF, and consistently found that on the protein level, an addition or omission of a proline or a charged amino acid in the SLC26A4 sequence is detrimental to its function. These types of changes may be adequate for predicting SLC26A4 functionality in the absence of direct functional tests.",2 1
"High-density CT of muscle and liver may allow early diagnosis of childhood-onset Pompe disease. || Child Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Liver Muscle, Skeletal Tomography, X-Ray Computed || Pompe disease is classified into infantile-, childhood- and adult-onset forms based on onset age and the degree of organ involvement. Differing from the infantile-onset form which is characterized by marked organ involvement, the childhood-onset form usually presents with muscle weakness and elevation of serum creatine kinase (CK), mimicking those of progressive muscular dystrophy. We report our successful early diagnosis and initiation of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) in a young girl with childhood-onset Pompe disease before the development of skeletal muscle symptoms. She was referred to our hospital at the age of 2 years 4 months because of hyperCKemia detected incidentally. She was active and lacked developmental delay and muscle weakness; however, hepatomegaly was noted. The combination of high-density changes in the liver and skeletal muscle on computed tomography (CT) images was suggestive of glycogen storage disorder, especially childhood-onset Pompe disease. Low alpha-glucosidase (GAA) activity on dried blood spots facilitated the diagnostic process, and genetic analysis of GAA allowed a definitive diagnosis, without performing muscle biopsy. We promptly started ERT at the age of 2 years 6 months. After 1 year, she still had not developed any skeletal muscle symptoms, and serum CK level was almost normal. Since the efficacy of ERT is thought to depend on the extent of muscle damage at its commencement, we expect that ERT may have prevented the manifestation of skeletal muscle involvement in this patient.",1
"Extremely discrepant mutation spectrum of SLC26A4 between Chinese patients with isolated Mondini deformity and enlarged vestibular aqueduct. || Adolescent Adult Amino Acid Sequence Asian Continental Ancestry Group Child Child, Preschool China Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Hearing Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Infant Male Membrane Transport Proteins Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype Radiography Sequence Alignment Sulfate Transporters Vestibular Aqueduct Young Adult || Mutations in SLC26A4 cause Pendred syndrome (hearing loss with goiter) or DFNB4 (non-syndromic hearing loss with inner ear malformation, such as enlarged vestibular aqueduct or Mondini deformity). The relationship between mutations in SLC26A4 and Mondini deformity without enlarged vestibular aqueduct has not been studied in any Chinese deaf population. The purpose of this study was to assess whether mutations in the SLC26A4 gene cause Mondini deformity without an enlarged vestibular aqueduct (isolated Mondini deformity) in a Chinese population. In total, 144 patients with sensorineural hearing loss were included and subjected to high-resolution temporal bone CT. Among them, 28 patients with isolated Mondini dysplasia (MD group), 50 patients with enlarged vestibular aqueduct with Mondini dysplasia (EVA with MD group), 50 patients with enlarged vestibular aqueduct without Mondini dysplasia (EVA group), and 16 patients with other types of inner ear malformations (IEM group) were identified. The coding exons of SLC26A4 were analyzed in all subjects. DNA sequence analysis of SLC26A4 was performed in all 144 patients. In the different groups, the detection rate of the SLC26A4 mutation differed. In the isolated MD group, only one single allelic mutation in SLC26A4 was found in one patient (1/28, 3.6%). In the EVA with MD group, biallelic and monoallelic SLC26A4 mutations were identified in 46 patients (46/50, 92.0%) and three patients (3/50, 6.0%), respectively. Also, in the EVA group, biallelic and monoallelic SLC26A4 mutations were identified in 46 patients (46/50, 92.0%) and three patients (3/50, 6.0%), respectively. These percentages were identical to those in the EVA plus MD group. Only two patients carried monoallelic mutations of the SLC26A4 gene in the IEM group (2/16, 12.5%). There were significant differences in the frequency of SLC26A4 mutation among the groups (P<0.001). The detection rate of SLC26A4 mutation in the isolated MD group was significantly lower than in the EVA group (with or without MD; P<0.001), and there was no significant difference in the detection rate of SLC26A4 between the MD group and IEM group (P>0.5). Although mutations in the SLC26A4 gene were frequently found in Chinese EVA patients with and without MD, there was no evidence to show a relationship between isolated MD and the SLC26A4 gene in the Chinese population examined. Hearing impairment in patients with isolated MD may be caused by factors other than mutations in the SLC26A4 gene.",1
"Clinical and GAA gene mutation analysis in mainland Chinese patients with late-onset Pompe disease: identifying c.2238G > C as the most common mutation. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Asian Continental Ancestry Group Child Child, Preschool China Genetic Association Studies Genetic Predisposition to Disease Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Pedigree Point Mutation Respiratory Function Tests Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive lysosomal glycogen storage disorder that has been reported in different ethnic populations which carry different common mutations of the acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) gene. The GAA mutation pattern in mainland Chinese patients with late-onset Pompe disease is still not well understood. We presented the clinical and genetic characteristics of 27 mainland Chinese late-onset Pompe patients from 24 families. GAA mutation analysis revealed 26 different mutations, including 10 that were novel. The allelic frequency of c.2238G > C (p.W746C) was found to be 27.08% in this patient group. Respiratory dysfunction was diagnosed in 10 of 11 patients who underwent pulmonary function evaluation, although only four required ventilator support at night. Our findings indicate that c.2238G > C (p.W746C) is the most common mutation in mainland Chinese late-onset Pompe patients, as observed in Taiwanese patients. The novel mutations identified in this study expand the genetic spectrum of late-onset Pompe disease, and the prevalence of respiratory dysfunction highlights the importance of monitoring pulmonary function in late-onset Pompe patients.",1
"Clinical and genetic studies in Spanish patients with Usher syndrome type II: description of new mutations and evidence for a lack of genotype--phenotype correlation. || Adult Child Codon, Nonsense DNA Mutational Analysis Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Frameshift Mutation Gene Frequency Genotype Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Mutation Mutation, Missense Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Retinitis Pigmentosa Spain Syndrome || Patients with Usher syndrome type II (USH2) show moderate-to-severe hearing loss (HL), retinitis pigmentosa and normal vestibular function. The progression of HL remains controversial. To evaluate whether a phenotype-genotype correlation exists regarding the issue of progression of HL, only USH2 patients with a defined genotype were selected. Ophthalmologic, vestibular and audiometric examination along with a mutation analysis of the USH2A gene (exons 1--21) was performed in twenty-eight Spanish USH2 patients. Ten different pathogenic mutations and 17 sequence variants not associated with the disease were found. Six of the 10 mutations are novel. Disease alleles were identified in 13 of the 28 families tested. Eight of these 13 families had a mutation found in both alleles. In the other five families, only one mutation was identified. The phenotypic data provide evidence for the existence of phenotypic differences between patients with the same genotype. These differences were observed at both the interfamilial and intrafamilial levels.",2 1
"Lack of significant association between mutations of KCNJ10 or FOXI1 and SLC26A4 mutations in Pendred syndrome/enlarged vestibular aqueducts. || Alleles Forkhead Transcription Factors Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Goiter Goiter, Nodular Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Sequence Analysis, DNA Sulfate Transporters Vestibular Aqueduct || Pendred syndrome is a common autosomal recessive disorder causing deafness. Features include sensorineural hearing impairment, goitre, enlarged vestibular aqueducts (EVA) and occasionally Mondini dysplasia. Hearing impairment and EVA may occur in the absence of goitre or thyroid dyshormonogensis in a condition known as non-syndromic EVA. A significant number of patients with Pendred syndrome and non-syndromic EVA show only one mutation in SLC26A4. Two genes, KCNJ10, encoding an inwardly rectifying potassium channel and FOXI1, a transcriptional factor gene, are thought to play a role in the disease phenotypes. Using Polymerase Chain Reaction and Sanger sequencing, sixty-eight patients with monoallelic mutations of SLC26A4 were tested for mutations in KCNJ10 and FOXI1. Two variants were observed in the KCNJ10 gene, p.Arg271Cys in three patients and p.Arg18Gln in one patient; only one variant, p.Arg123Trp was observed in the FOXI1 gene in a single patient. Both p.Arg271Cys and p.Arg18Gln are likely to be polymorphisms as judged by their frequency in the general population. Therefore we found no evidence for a significant association between mutations of KCNJ10 and FOXI1 with SLC26A4. It was also observed that the variant, p.Arg271Cys in KCNJ10, previously thought to have a protective effect against seizure susceptibility, was found in a patient with Pendred syndrome with co-existing epilepsy.",1
"The sensitivity of exome sequencing in identifying pathogenic mutations for LGMD in the United States. || Base Sequence Distal Myopathies Exome Female Genetic Testing Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy, Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, Facioscapulohumeral Mutation Myopathies, Structural, Congenital Sequence Analysis, DNA United States || The current study characterizes a cohort of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) in the United States using whole-exome sequencing. Fifty-five families affected by LGMD were recruited using an institutionally approved protocol. Exome sequencing was performed on probands and selected parental samples. Pathogenic mutations and cosegregation patterns were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Twenty-two families (40%) had novel and previously reported pathogenic mutations, primarily in LGMD genes, and also in genes for Duchenne muscular dystrophy, facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, congenital myopathy, myofibrillar myopathy, inclusion body myopathy and Pompe disease. One family was diagnosed via clinical testing. Dominant mutations were identified in COL6A1, COL6A3, FLNC, LMNA, RYR1, SMCHD1 and VCP, recessive mutations in ANO5, CAPN3, GAA, LAMA2, SGCA and SGCG, and X-linked mutations in DMD. A previously reported variant in DMD was confirmed to be benign. Exome sequencing is a powerful diagnostic tool for LGMD. Despite careful phenotypic screening, pathogenic mutations were found in other muscle disease genes, largely accounting for the increased sensitivity of exome sequencing. Our experience suggests that broad sequencing panels are useful for these analyses because of the phenotypic overlap of many neuromuscular conditions. The confirmation of a benign DMD variant illustrates the potential of exome sequencing to help determine pathogenicity.",1
"Update of the pompe disease mutation database with 60 novel GAA sequence variants and additional studies on the functional effect of 34 previously reported variants. || Databases, Genetic Genetic Predisposition to Disease Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive lysosomal glycogen storage disorder, characterized by progressive muscle weakness. Deficiency of acid α-glucosidase (EC; 3.2.1.20/3) can be caused by numerous pathogenic variants in the GAA gene. The Pompe Disease Mutation Database at http://www.pompecenter.nl aims to list all variants and their effect. This update reports on 94 variants. We examined 35 novel and 34 known mutations by site-directed mutagenesis and transient expression in COS-7 cells or HEK293T cells. Each of these mutations was given a severity rating using a previously published system, based on the level of acid α-glucosidase activity in medium and transfected cells and on the quantity and quality of the different molecular mass species in the posttranslational modification and transport of acid α-glucosidase. This approach enabled to classify 55 missense mutations as pathogenic and 13 as likely nonpathogenic. Based on their nature and the use of in silico analysis (Alamut® software), 12 of the additional 25 novel mutations were predicted to be pathogenic including 4 splicing mutations, 6 mutations leading to frameshift, and 2 point mutations causing stop codons. Seven of the additional mutations were considered nonpathogenic (4 silent and 3 occurring in intron regions), and 6 are still under investigation.",1 4 0
"BH4-sensitive hyperphenylalaninemia: new case and review of literature. || Biopterin Humans Infant Male Phenylalanine Phenylketonurias || We report a patient with BH(4)-sensitive phenylketonuria. In neonatal screening, phenylalanine levels above 10 mg/dl were detected. In the tetrahydrobiopterin- (BH(4)) loading test, phenylalanine concentrations in serum fell significantly. Dihydropteridine reductase activity in blood, pterines, and neurotransmitters in cerebrospinal fluid, as well as pterines in urine were all normal. Mutation analysis revealed compound-heterozygosity for the mutations R408W and K320N. Under BH(4)-supplementation without a specific phenylalanine-reduced diet, phenylalanine-concentrations are in the therapeutic range and our patient developed normally.",3 1
"Childhood Pompe disease: clinical spectrum and genotype in 31 patients. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool Cross-Sectional Studies Diagnosis, Differential Female Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Motor Activity Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || As little information is available on children with non-classic presentations of Pompe disease, we wished to gain knowledge of specific clinical characteristics and genotypes. We included all patients younger than 18 years, who had been evaluated at the Pompe Center in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, between 1975 and 2012, excluding those with the classic-infantile form. None were treated with enzyme replacement therapy at the time of evaluation. We collected information on first symptoms, diagnosis, use of a wheelchair and/or respirator, and enzyme and mutation analysis and assessed muscle strength, pulmonary function, and cardiac parameters. Thirty-one patients participated. Median age at symptom onset was 2.6 years (range 0.5-13y) and at diagnosis 4.0 years. Most first problems were delayed motor development and problems related to limb-girdle weakness. Fatigue, persistent diarrhea and problems in raising the head in supine position were other first complaints. Ten patients were asymptomatic at time of diagnosis. Five of them developed symptoms before inclusion in this study. Over 50 % of all patients had low or absent reflexes, a myopathic face, and scoliosis; 29 % were underweight. Muscle strength of the neck flexors, hip extensors, hip flexors, and shoulder abductors were most frequently reduced. Pulmonary function was decreased in over 48 % of the patients; 2 patients had cardiac hypertrophy. Patients with mutations other than the c.-32-13T > G were overall more severely affected, while 18 out of the 21 patients (86 %) with the c.-32-13T > G/'null' genotype were male. Our study shows that Pompe disease can present with severe mobility and respiratory problems during childhood. Pompe disease should be considered in the differential diagnosis of children with less familiar signs such as disproportional weakness of the neck flexors, unexplained fatigue, persistent diarrhea and unexplained high CK/ASAT/ALAT. Disease presentation appears to be different from adult patients. The majority of affected children with GAA genotype c.-32-13T > G/'null' appeared to be male.",1 0
"The natural course of infantile Pompe's disease: 20 original cases compared with 133 cases from the literature. || Blood Chemical Analysis Brain Cardiomegaly Child Development Disease Progression Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Infant, Premature Mutation Netherlands Survival Analysis alpha-Glucosidases || Infantile Pompe's disease is a lethal cardiac and muscular disorder. Current developments toward enzyme replacement therapy are promising. The aim of our study is to delineate the natural course of the disease to verify endpoints of clinical studies. A total of 20 infantile patients diagnosed by the collaborative Dutch centers and 133 cases reported in literature were included in the study. Information on clinical history, physical examination, and diagnostic parameters was collected. The course of Pompe's disease is essentially the same in the Dutch and the general patient population. Symptoms start at a median age of 1.6 months in both groups. The median age of death is 7.7 and 6 months, respectively. Five percent of the Dutch patients and 8% of all reported patients survive beyond 1 year of age. Only 2 patients from literature became older than 18 months. A progressive cardiac hypertrophy is characteristic for infantile Pompe's disease. The diastolic thickness of the left ventricular posterior wall and cardiac weight at autopsy increase significantly with age. Motor development is severely delayed and major developmental milestones are generally not achieved. For the Dutch patient group, growth deviates significantly from normal despite start of nasogastric tube feeding. Levels of aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase, or creatine kinase-myocardial band isoenzyme are typically elevated, although aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and lactate dehydrogenase increase significantly with age. The patients have fully deleterious mutations. Acid alpha-glucosidase activity is severely deficient. Survival, decrease of the diastolic thickness of the left ventricular posterior wall, and achievement of major motor milestones are valid endpoints for therapeutic studies of infantile Pompe's disease. Mutation analysis and measurement of the alpha-glucosidase activity should be part of the enrollment program.",3 1
"A frequent oligogenic involvement in congenital hypothyroidism. || Cohort Studies Computational Biology Congenital Hypothyroidism Female High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Italy Male Multifactorial Inheritance Mutation Pedigree Phenotype || Congenital hypothyroidism (CH), the most frequent form of preventable mental retardation, is predicted to have a relevant genetic origin. However, CH is frequently reported to be sporadic and candidate gene variations were found in <10% of the investigated patients. Here, we characterize the involvement of 11 candidate genes through a systematic Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) analysis. The NGS was performed in 177 unrelated CH patients (94 gland-in-situ; 83 dysgenesis) and in 3,538 control subjects. Non-synonymous or splicing rare variants (MAF < 0.01) were accepted, and their functional impact was predicted by a comprehensive bioinformatic approach and co-segregation studies. The frequency of variations in cases and controls was extended to 18 CH-unrelated genes. At least one rare variant was accepted in 103/177 patients. Monogenic recessive forms of the disease were found in five cases, but oligogenic involvement was detected in 39 patients. The 167 variations were found to affect all genes independently of the CH phenotype. These findings were replicated in an independent cohort of additional 145 CH cases. When compared to 3,538 controls, the CH population was significantly enriched with disrupting variants in the candidate genes (P = 5.5 × 10-7), but not with rare variations in CH-unrelated genes. Co-segregation studies of the hypothyroid phenotype with multiple gene variants in several pedigrees confirmed the potential oligogenic origin of CH. The systematic NGS approach reveals the frequent combination of rare variations in morphogenetic or functional candidate genes in CH patients independently of phenotype. The oligogenic origin represents a suitable explanation for the frequent sporadic CH occurrence.",1
"Ten novel mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) observed in Brazilian patients with phenylketonuria. ||  || In the present study we report on the identification of ten novel mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene of Brazilian patients with phenylketonuria (PKU): IVS5-54A>G, IVS6+17G>T, E205A, F240S, K274E, I318T, L321L, C357G, IVS11+17G>A and S411X. These mutations were detected during the characterization of the PAH genotypes of 115 patients with PKU from the southeast region of Brazil. The results obtained confirm the high heterogeneity of the PAH gene and provide information about the distribution of PKU mutations in the Brazilian population.",3 1
"PAH gene mutations in the Sicilian population: association with minihaplotypes and expression analysis. || Alleles Animals Blotting, Northern COS Cells Child DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic Genotype Haplotypes Humans Male Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic RNA, Messenger Recombinant Fusion Proteins Sicily || The molecular basis of PAH deficiency in the Sicilian population is characterized by a marked heterogeneity, with 44 mutations at a single locus identified by a ""gene-scanning"" approach and accounting for a detection rate of 91%. The remaining 9% of PAH alleles does not bear mutations in any of the 13 exons and 24 exon/intron junctions. Three mutations IVS10nt-11 G > A, R261Q, and A300S accounted for 30.5%, whereas the remaining mutations were found at relative frequencies of less than 5% and 20 mutations were observed once only. Five mutations have been detected only in Sicilians so far. By studying the association of mutations with intragenic STR-VNTR haplotypes (""minihaplotypes""), ""identity by descent"" has been established for 24 mutations also detected in other populations. This finding supports the hypothesis of a multipolar origin for a large proportion of PAH mutant alleles currently detected in Sicilians. In order to improve our understanding of the clinical heterogeneity of PAH deficiency in this population, we have for the first time analyzed three missense mutations L41F, T92I, and P211T in vitro by the pCDNA3/COS-7 eukaryotic expression system and found an activity of 10, 76, and 72%, respectively, compared to normal PAH. In two HPA patients with mild PKU and mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP), harboring respectively L41F/R261Q and T92I/P281L genotypes, the predicted biochemical effect of these genotypes appeared to be consistent with the metabolic phenotypes. In contrast, discordant metabolic phenotypes (mild PKU and MHP) were observed in two unrelated patients bearing the same R261Q/P211T genotype, a finding which underscores the complex relationship linking genotype to phenotype in PAH deficiency. Hypotheses on the possible mechanisms responsible for the observed discordance are discussed. The spectrum of PAH gene mutations in Sicily reflects the complex demographic history of this island at the crossroad of prehistoric and historical migrations in the Mediterranean sea. The data presented in this study also add to the present knowledge on the relationship between PAH genotypes and HPA phenotype and are expected to improve PAH genotyping among individuals with hyperphenylalaninemia.",3 1 0
"Clinical features and outcome of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated with triple sarcomere protein gene mutations. || Actin Cytoskeleton Adult Age of Onset Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Female Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Sarcomeres || The aim of this study was to describe the clinical profile associated with triple sarcomere gene mutations in a large hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) cohort. In patients with HCM, double or compound sarcomere gene mutation heterozygosity might be associated with earlier disease onset and more severe outcome. The occurrence of triple mutations has not been reported. A total of 488 unrelated index HCM patients underwent screening for myofilament gene mutations by direct deoxyribonucleic acid sequencing of 8 genes, including myosin binding protein C (MYBPC3), beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH7), regulatory and essential light chains (MYL2, MYL3), troponin-T (TNNT2), troponin-I (TNNI3), alpha-tropomyosin (TPM1), and actin (ACTC). Of the 488 index patients, 4 (0.8%) harbored triple mutations, as follows: MYH7-R869H, MYBPC3-E258K, and TNNI3-A86fs in a 32-year-old woman; MYH7-R723C, MYH7-E1455X, and MYBPC3-E165D in a 46-year old man; MYH7-R869H, MYBPC3-K1065fs, and MYBPC3-P371R in a 45-year old woman; and MYH7-R1079Q, MYBPC3-Q969X, and MYBPC3-R668H in a 50-year old woman. One had a history of resuscitated cardiac arrest, and 3 had significant risk factors for sudden cardiac death, prompting the insertion of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator in all, with appropriate shocks in 2 patients. Moreover, 3 of 4 patients had a severe phenotype with progression to end-stage HCM by the fourth decade, requiring cardiac transplantation (n=1) or biventricular pacing (n=2). The fourth patient, however, had clinically mild disease. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by triple sarcomere gene mutations was rare but conferred a remarkably increased risk of end-stage progression and ventricular arrhythmias, supporting an association between multiple sarcomere defects and adverse outcome. Comprehensive genetic testing might provide important insights to risk stratification and potentially indicate the need for differential surveillance strategies based on genotype.",1 4
"Predicting cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM) status in Pompe disease using GAA mutations: lessons learned from 10 years of clinical laboratory testing experience. || Antibody Formation Cells, Cultured Cross Reactions Enzyme Replacement Therapy Ethnic Groups Fibroblasts Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunomodulation Infant Infant, Newborn Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) for Pompe disease using recombinant acid alpha-glucosidase (rhGAA) has resulted in increased survival although the clinical response is variable. Cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM)-negative status has been recognized as a poor prognostic factor. CRIM-negative patients make no GAA protein and develop sustained high antibody titers to ERT that render the treatment ineffective. Antibody titers are generally low for the majority of CRIM-positive patients and there is typically a better clinical outcome. Because immunomodulation has been found to be most effective in CRIM-negative patients prior to, or shortly after, initiation of ERT, knowledge of CRIM status is important before ERT is begun. We have analyzed 243 patients with infantile Pompe disease using a Western blot method for determining CRIM status and using cultured skin fibroblasts. Sixty-one out of 243 (25.1%) patients tested from various ethnic backgrounds were found to be CRIM-negative. We then correlated the CRIM results with GAA gene mutations where available (52 CRIM-negative and 88 CRIM-positive patients). We found that, in most cases, CRIM status can be predicted from GAA mutations, potentially circumventing the need for invasive skin biopsy and time wasted in culturing cells in the future. Continued studies in this area will help to increase the power of GAA gene mutations in predicting CRIM status as well as possibly identifying CRIM-positive patients who are at risk for developing high antibody titers.",3 1 4 0
"Mutational screening of the USH2A gene in Spanish USH patients reveals 23 novel pathogenic mutations. || Adolescent Adult DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Mutation, Missense Phenotype Spain Usher Syndromes Young Adult || Usher Syndrome type II (USH2) is an autosomal recessive disorder, characterized by moderate to severe hearing impairment and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). Among the three genes implicated, mutations in the USH2A gene account for 74-90% of the USH2 cases. To identify the genetic cause of the disease and determine the frequency of USH2A mutations in a cohort of 88 unrelated USH Spanish patients, we carried out a mutation screening of the 72 coding exons of this gene by direct sequencing. Moreover, we performed functional minigene studies for those changes that were predicted to affect splicing. As a result, a total of 144 DNA sequence variants were identified. Based upon previous studies, allele frequencies, segregation analysis, bioinformatics' predictions and in vitro experiments, 37 variants (23 of them novel) were classified as pathogenic mutations. This report provide a wide spectrum of USH2A mutations and clinical features, including atypical Usher syndrome phenotypes resembling Usher syndrome type I. Considering only the patients clearly diagnosed with Usher syndrome type II, and results obtained in this and previous studies, we can state that mutations in USH2A are responsible for 76.1% of USH2 disease in patients of Spanish origin.",1 0
"Enzyme replacement therapy in late-onset Pompe's disease: a three-year follow-up. || Adolescent Adult Animals Child Female Follow-Up Studies Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Linear Models Male Muscle, Skeletal Pilot Projects Rabbits Recombinant Proteins Recovery of Function alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe's disease is an autosomal recessive myopathy. The characteristic lysosomal storage of glycogen is caused by acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency. Patients with late-onset Pompe's disease present with progressive muscle weakness also affecting pulmonary function. In search of a treatment, we investigated the feasibility of enzyme replacement therapy with recombinant human alpha-glucosidase from rabbit milk. Three patients (aged 11, 16, and 32 years) were enrolled in the study. They were all wheelchair-bound and two of them were ventilator dependent with a history of deteriorating pulmonary function. After 3 years of treatment with weekly infusions of alpha-glucosidase, the patients had stabilized pulmonary function and reported less fatigue. The youngest and least affected patient showed an impressive improvement of skeletal muscle strength and function. After 72 weeks of treatment, he could walk without support and finally abandoned his wheelchair. Our findings demonstrate that recombinant human alpha-glucosidase from rabbit milk has a therapeutic effect in late-onset Pompe's disease. There is good reason to continue the development of enzyme replacement therapy for Pompe's disease and to explore further the production of human therapeutic proteins in the milk of mammals.",1
"Mutations in myosin VIIA (MYO7A) and usherin (USH2A) in Spanish patients with Usher syndrome types I and II, respectively. ||  || Usher syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by congenital hearing impairment and retinitis pigmentosa. Three clinical types are known (USH1, USH2 and USH3), and there is an extensive genetic heterogeneity, with at least ten genes implicated. The most frequently mutated genes are MYO7A, which causes USH1B, and usherin, which causes USH2A. We carried out a mutation analysis of these two genes in the Spanish population. Analysis of the MYO7A gene in patients from 30 USH1 families and sporadic cases identified 32% of disease alleles, with mutation Q821X being the most frequent. Most of the remaining variants are private mutations. With regard to USH2, mutation 2299delG was detected in 25% of the Spanish patients. Altogether the mutations detected in USH2A families account for 23% of the disease alleles.",1
"Late-onset Pompe disease with complicated intracranial aneurysm: a Chinese case report. ||  || Pompe disease is a rare autosomal recessive hereditary disease caused by genetic defects of acid maltase. This disease could be divided into two forms: infantile and late-onset, which mainly affect cardiac, respiratory, and skeletal muscle systems. Late-onset patients mainly show symptoms of skeletal muscle involvement, but recent reports have found that the central nervous system was also affected in some patients. Herein, we report a case of a female, adolescent-onset Pompe patient, who was diagnosed with complicated intracranial aneurysm in adulthood.",1
"A chaperone enhances blood α-glucosidase activity in Pompe disease patients treated with enzyme replacement therapy. || 1-Deoxynojirimycin Adolescent Adult Animals Child Child, Preschool Disease Models, Animal Dried Blood Spot Testing Drug Synergism Enzyme Replacement Therapy Enzyme Stability Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Glycoside Hydrolase Inhibitors Humans Male Mice Middle Aged Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || Enzyme replacement therapy is currently the only approved treatment for Pompe disease, due to acid α-glucosidase deficiency. Clinical efficacy of this approach is variable, and more effective therapies are needed. We showed in preclinical studies that chaperones stabilize the recombinant enzyme used for enzyme replacement therapy. Here, we evaluated the effects of a combination of enzyme therapy and a chaperone on α-glucosidase activity in Pompe disease patients. α-Glucosidase activity was analyzed by tandem-mass spectrometry in dried blood spots from patients treated with enzyme replacement therapy, either alone or in combination with the chaperone N-butyldeoxynojirimycin given at the time of the enzyme infusion. Thirteen patients with different presentations (3 infantile-onset, 10 late-onset) were enrolled. In 11 patients, the combination treatment resulted in α-glucosidase activities greater than 1.85-fold the activities with enzyme replacement therapy alone. In the whole patient population, α-glucosidase activity was significantly increased at 12 hours (2.19-fold, P = 0.002), 24 hours (6.07-fold, P = 0.001), and 36 hours (3.95-fold, P = 0.003). The areas under the curve were also significantly increased (6.78-fold, P = 0.002). These results suggest improved stability of recombinant α-glucosidase in blood in the presence of the chaperone.",1
"Human phenylalanine hydroxylase mutations and hyperphenylalaninemia phenotypes: a metanalysis of genotype-phenotype correlations. || Alleles Animals COS Cells Chromosomes, Human, Pair 12 Enzyme Induction Frameshift Mutation Genetic Heterogeneity Genotype Humans Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Point Mutation RNA Splicing Recombinant Fusion Proteins Sequence Deletion || We analyzed correlations between mutant genotypes at the human phenylalanine hydroxylase locus (gene symbol PAH) and the corresponding hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) phenotypes (notably, phenylketonuria [OMIM 261600]). We used reports, both published and in the PAH Mutation Analysis Consortium Database, on 365 patients harboring 73 different PAH mutations in 161 different genotypes. HPA phenotypes were classified as phenylketonuria (PKU), variant PKU, and non-PKU HPA. By analysis both of homoallelic mutant genotypes and of ""functionally hemizygous"" heteroallelic genotypes, we characterized the phenotypic effect of 48 of the 73 different, largely missense mutations. Among those with consistent in vivo expression, 24 caused PKU, 3 caused variant PKU, and 10 caused non-PKU HPA. However, 11 mutations were inconsistent in their effect: 9 appeared in two different phenotype classes, and 2 (I65T and Y414C) appeared in all three classes. Seven mutations were inconsistent in phenotypic effect when in vitro (unit-protein) expression was compared with the corresponding in vivo phenotype (an emergent property). We conclude that the majority of PAH mutations confer a consistent phenotype and that this is concordant with their effects, when known, predicted from in vitro expression analysis. However, significant inconsistencies, both between in vitro and in vivo phenotypes and between different individuals with similar PAH genotypes, reveal that the HPA-phenotype is more complex than that predicted by Mendelian inheritance of alleles at the PAH locus.",1
"Juvenile and adult-onset acid maltase deficiency in France: genotype-phenotype correlation. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Child Female France Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Middle Aged Muscles Mutation Phenotype Tomography, X-Ray Computed || To characterize the phenotypes of patients with juvenile and adult-onset acid maltase deficiency (AMD) in the French population and correlate them with genetic defects. AMD is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by the absence of the enzyme acid a-glucosidase (GAA). Patients are generally compound heterozygotes for various mutations in the GAA gene. The most common mutant allele is a -13T to G transversion in intron 1. The authors performed a clinical, biochemical, and genetic study on 21 unrelated patients with juvenile and adult-onset AMD. Although onset of progressive muscle weakness occurred during adulthood in all cases but one, presence of mild, nonprogressive muscular symptoms appearing during childhood was detected in 16 patients. Eighteen patients had a similar clinical pattern with pelvic girdle muscle weakness predominating in glutei and thigh adductors. Restrictive respiratory insufficiency with vital capacity less than 60% was noted in eight patients, and respiratory failure was the first manifestation in two cases. All patients but one were compound heterozygotes, and 17 carried the IVS1 (-13T ---> G) transversion (one patient was homozygous for this mutation). The two mutated alleles were identified in 10 cases, with 13 different mutations detected in the GAA gene. There was no clear correlation between the type of mutation and phenotype. This study shows a high genetic heterogeneity of juvenile and adult AMD in the French population. The absence of genotype-phenotype correlation suggests a complex physiopathology that requires further investigations.",1 4
"Very Early Treatment for Infantile-Onset Pompe Disease Contributes to Better Outcomes. || Cohort Studies Early Medical Intervention Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Time Factors Treatment Outcome || To evaluate whether very early treatment in our patients would result in better clinical outcomes and to compare these data with other infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD) cohort studies. In this nationwide program, 669,797 newborns were screened for Pompe disease. We diagnosed IOPD in 14 of these newborns, and all were treated and followed in our hospital. After 2010, the mean age at first enzyme-replacement therapy (ERT) was 11.92 days. Our patients had better biological, physical, and developmental outcomes and lower anti-rh acid α-glucosidase antibodies after 2 years of treatment, even compared with one group that began ERT just 10 days later than our cohort. No patient had a hearing disorder or abnormal vision. The mean age for independent walking was 11.6 ± 1.3 months, the same age as normal children. ERT for patients with IOPD should be initiated as early as possible before irreversible damage occurs. Our results indicate that early identification of patients with IOPD allows for the very early initiation of ERT. Starting ERT even a few days earlier may lead to better patient outcomes.",1
"Influence of PAH Genotype on Sapropterin Response in PKU: Results of a Single-Center Cohort Study. ||  || Identifying phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) mutations associated with sapropterin response in phenylketonuria (PKU) would be an advantageous means to determine clinical benefit to sapropterin therapy. Sapropterin response, defined as a ≥30 % reduction in phenylalanine (Phe) levels after a dose of 10 mg/kg/day sapropterin for week one and 20 mg/kg/day for week two in 112 PKU patients aged 4-45 years, was assessed in an outpatient setting. PAH was sequenced in all patients. Mutations were correlated with sapropterin response. Dietary Phe intake was increased over a 6-week period in responsive patients. Forty-six of 112 patients were sapropterin responsive. Genotypes p.[L48S];[L48S] and p.[Y414C];[Y414C] were always associated with response at a low dose. The mutation Y414C (present on 16 alleles) was most frequently associated with response. Patients with presence of the mutation L48S on at least one allele (12 alleles in 7 patients) always showed response to sapropterin. Responsive patients had a mean Phe tolerance increase of 189 % (range 11-742 %). In the 66 nonresponders, mutations R408W (38 alleles) and IVS12+1G>A (18 alleles) were detected most frequently. Genotypes [IVS12+1G>A];[IVS12+1G>A], p.[L348V];[R408W], p.[P281L];[P281L], p.[R158Q];[R408W], and p.[R261Q];[R408W] were always associated with nonresponse. Data from the study contributes to growing evidence of the relationship between PAH genotype and PKU phenotype. In most cases, response to sapropterin therapy cannot be predicted based on the presence of a single mutation on one allele alone, although the complete PAH genotype may help to predict sapropterin responsiveness in PKU patients.",1
"The spectrum of phenylalanine variations under tetrahydrobiopterin load in subjects affected by phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. ||  || A fall in blood phenylalanine (Phe) after tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) administration is a common trait in phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH, EC 1.14.16.1) deficiency (McKusick 261600). To explore the extent and biological correlates of this phenomenon we studied: (a) the spectrum of BH(4) response in patients with PAH deficiency; (b) the variability of BH(4) response according to the severity of the biochemical phenotype; and (c) the variability of the response to BH(4) in subjects with the same genotype. Fifty PAH-deficient subjects (age 1 month-35 years) were enrolled for the study (5 with mild hyperphenylalaninaemia (MHPHE), 15 with mild phenylketonuria (MPKU) and 30 with classic phenylketonuria (CPKU) and underwent an identical schedule of blood samplings 24 h before and after oral BH(4) challenge (6(R)-BH4, 20 mg/kg per day), leaving Phe intake unchanged. The effect of BH(4) on blood Phe concentration was evaluated according to the percent decrease of Phe during the 24 h following the challenge (criterion a), and as variation exceeding the individual variability of blood Phe (criterion b). The number of BH(4)-responders according to criterion b was 31 (including all the 14 detected by criterion a): 17 out of 30 CPKU (57%), 9 out of 15 MPKU (60%), and all the MHPHE subjects (chi(2) = 3.45, df = 2, p = 0.178). The effect of BH(4) showed a large interindividual variability unrelated to diagnostic classification, basal value of blood Phe, maximum percentage of Phe reduction, Phe intake, and genotype. Some inconsistencies were found in patients with identical genotype. The first responsive case homozygous for the severe R408W mutation was found. Two new mutations, Y387X and G352C, were identified (the former was BH(4)-responsive), and the responsiveness of three already reported mutations (R261Q, D338Y, T92I) was substantiated.",3 1
"A novel splice-site mutation in the GJB2 gene causing mild postlingual hearing impairment. ||  || The DFNB1 subtype of autosomal recessive, nonsyndromic hearing impairment, caused by mutations affecting the GJB2 (connexin-26) [corrected] gene, is highly prevalent in most populations worldwide. DFNB1 hearing impairment is mostly severe or profound and usually appears before the acquisition of speech (prelingual onset), though a small number of hypomorphic missense mutations result in mild or moderate deafness of postlingual onset. We identified a novel GJB2 splice-site mutation, c. -22-2A>C, in three siblings with mild postlingual hearing impairment that were compound heterozygous for c. -22-2A>C and c.35delG. Reverse transcriptase-PCR experiments performed on total RNA extracted from saliva samples from one of these siblings confirmed that c. -22-2A>C abolished the acceptor splice site of the single GJB2 intron, resulting in the absence of normally processed transcripts from this allele. However, we did isolate transcripts from the c. -22-2A>C allele that keep an intact GJB2 coding region and that were generated by use of an alternative acceptor splice site previously unknown. The residual expression of wild-type connexin-26 [corrected] encoded by these transcripts probably underlies the mild severity and late onset of the hearing impairment of these subjects.",2 1 0
"Genotype-phenotype associations in French patients with phenylketonuria and importance of genotype for full assessment of tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness. || Biopterin Cohort Studies Female France Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Male Phenotype Phenylketonurias Treatment Outcome || Mutations in Phenylalanine Hydroxylase (PAH) gene cause phenylketonuria. Sapropterin (BH4), the enzyme cofactor, is an important therapeutical strategy in phenylketonuria. However, PAH is a highly polymorphic gene and it is difficult to identify BH4-responsive genotypes. We seek here to improve prediction of BH4-responsiveness through comparison of genotypes, BH4-loading test, predictions of responsiveness according to the literature and types and locations of mutations. A total of 364 French patients among which, 9 % had mild hyperphenylalaninemia, 17.7 % mild phenylketonuria and 73.1 % classical phenylketonuria, benefited from a 24-hour BH4-loading test and had the PAH gene sequenced and analyzed by Multiplex Ligation Probe Amplification. Overall, 31.6 % of patients were BH4-responsive. The number of different mutations found was 127, including 26 new mutations. The mutations c.434A > T, c.500A > T, c.529G > C, c.1045 T > G and c.1196 T > C were newly classified as being BH4-responsive. We identified 261 genotypes, among which 46 were newly recognized as being BH4-responsive. Even though patients carry 2 responsive alleles, BH4-responsiveness cannot be predicted with certainty unless they present mild hyperphenylalaninemia. BH4-responsiveness cannot be predicted in patients carrying one responsive mutation only. In general, the milder the phenotype is, the stronger the BH4-response is. Almost exclusively missense mutations, particularly in exons 12, 11 and 8, are associated with BH4-responsiveness and any other type of mutation predicts a negative response. This study is the first of its kind, in a French population, to identify the phenotype associated with several combinations of PAH mutations. As others, it highlights the necessity of performing simultaneously BH4 loading test and molecular analysis in monitoring phenylketonuria patients.",3 1
"The phenylalanine hydroxylase c.30C>G synonymous variation (p.G10G) creates a common exonic splicing silencer. || Alternative Splicing Amino Acid Motifs Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Genes, Reporter Heterogeneous-Nuclear Ribonucleoprotein Group F-H Humans Molecular Sequence Data Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Protein Binding Silencer Elements, Transcriptional Trinucleotide Repeats beta-Hexosaminidase beta Chain || PKU is caused by mutations in PAH. A c.30C>G synonymous variation in exon 1, previously reported as neutral, was observed in two patients. The variation creates a GGG triplet, which is part of several exonic splicing silencer (ESS) motifs. Because the 5'-splice site of PAH exon 1 is intrinsically weak and therefore could be responsive to a new flanking ESS, we hypothesized that c.30C>G could cause aberrant mRNA splicing. We demonstrate that c.30C>G causes aberrant mRNA splicing in two different reporter minigenes, and that this is abolished if a preexisting flanking GGG triplet is disrupted. GGG triplets are part of the consensus motif bound by splicing-inhibitory hnRNPH proteins and we observed a dramatic increase in hnRNPH binding to c.30C>G PAH RNA. We conclude that c.30C>G creates a hnRNPH-binding ESS, which can disrupt mRNA splicing. A disease-causing mutation in HEXB, which has previously been associated with exon skipping in patients also creates a GGG triplet. We show that the mutant HEXB motif causes exon skipping of a reporter minigene and that this is also influenced by a flanking GGG triplet. We suggest that aberrant splicing caused by creation/abolishment of GGG triplets located together with a preexisting flanking GGG triplet, may be an underreported cause of human disease. It is important to recognize that exonic sequence changes may disrupt mRNA splicing. This is particularly important in PAH, since PKU patients harboring such mutations are unlikely to respond to therapy with 6R-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)), despite the fact that the genetic code indicates otherwise.",3 1 0
"Disease course in patients with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa due to the USH2A gene. ||  || To estimate the mean rates of ocular function loss in patients with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa due to USH2A mutations. In 125 patients with USH2A mutations, longitudinal regression was used to estimate mean rates of change in Snellen visual acuity, Goldmann visual field area (V4e white test light), and 30-Hz (cone) full-field electroretinogram amplitude. These rates were compared with those of previously studied cohorts with dominant retinitis pigmentosa due to RHO mutations and with X-linked retinitis pigmentosa due to RPGR mutations. Rates of change in patients with the Cys759Phe mutation, the USH2A mutation associated with nonsyndromic disease, were compared with rates of change in patients with the Glu767fs mutation, the most common USH2A mutation associated with Usher syndrome type II (i.e., retinitis pigmentosa and hearing loss). Mean annual exponential rates of decline for the USH2A patients were 2.6% for visual acuity, 7.0% for visual field area, and 13.2% for electroretinogram amplitude. The rate of acuity loss fell between the corresponding rates for the RHO and RPGR patients, whereas the rates for field and ERG amplitude loss were faster than those for the RHO and RPGR patients. No significant differences were found for patients with the Cys759Phe mutation versus patients with the Glu767fs mutation. On average, USH2A patients lose visual acuity faster than RHO patients and slower than RPGR patients. USH2A patients lose visual field and cone electroretinogram amplitude faster than patients with RHO or RPGR mutations. Patients with a nonsyndromic USH2A mutation have the same retinal disease course as patients with syndromic USH2A disease.",3 1
Two novel mutations in acid α-glucosidase gene in two patients with Pompe disease. || Base Sequence Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive lysosomal glycogen storage disorder (GSD) caused by acid α-glucosidase (GAA) deficiency. Pompe disease has a broad genotypic and phenotypic spectrum. The infantile-onset form is the most severe form and presents with hypotonia and cardiomyopathy in early infancy. The probands who died were found to have GSD type II based on clinical and biochemical findings. We report two families with Pompe disease in whom the parents' molecular analysis revealed two novel mutations: c.2045A>G (p.Q682R) and c.763C>T (p.Q255X).,1
"Rapid mutation screening of phenylketonuria by polymerase chain reaction-linked restriction enzyme assay and direct sequence of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene: clinical application in northern Japan and northern China. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool China DNA Mutational Analysis Feasibility Studies Genotype Haplotypes Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Introns Japan Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Sequence Analysis, DNA || We describe a simple and technically feasible method for mutation screening of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene and its application to Japanese and Chinese patients with hyperphenylalaninemia. The strategy is based on the identification of a nucleotide substitution by restriction enzyme analysis, coupled with PCR and direct sequencing of exon 7 of the PAH gene. Because the detection of various mutations can proceed simultaneously using the same technique, it is quite rapid and reproducible, making it possible to perform effective molecular diagnosis and carrier screening in most laboratories. Using this procedure, we found that the most common molecular defects were R413P in Hokkaido, Japan (35 %) and R243Q in Heilongjiang, China (50%). R111X, IVS4nt-1, and five mutations in exon 7 (R241C, R243Q, R252W, A259T, and S273P) accounted for 55% of phenylketonuria (PKU) alleles in Hokkaido. In Heilongjiang, the R111X, Y356X, and R408W mutations accounted for 35% of PKU alleles. Clinically, homozygotes or compound heterozygotes of null alleles, which express nonfunctional enzyme activity, were all associated with classic PKU. On the other hand, patients heterozygous for the R241C allele had a benign phenotype of mild hyperphenylalaninemia. The DNA diagnosis in early infancy can predict various PKU phenotypes, and can prove useful in decision-making concerning dietary therapy.",3 1
"New GAA mutations in Japanese patients with GSDII (Pompe disease). || Adolescent Adult Asian Continental Ancestry Group Child, Preschool Exons Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Mutation Polymorphism, Genetic alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe disease) is inherited by autosomal recessive transmission and caused by a deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA), resulting in impaired degradation and lysosomal accumulation of glycogen. The GAA gene, responsible for this disease, has been mapped to chromosome 17q25.2-25.3. To date, more than 70 disease-causing mutations have been identified. In this study, we present four mutations found in three Japanese patients with the juvenile form of glycogen storage disease type II; three of these mutations were new (R224W, S619R, and R660H). The pathogenicity of these new mutations was verified by the loss of function of the mutant enzymes expressed in COS cells.",1
"Mutation of a gene encoding a protein with extracellular matrix motifs in Usher syndrome type IIa. || Amino Acid Sequence Animals Cell Adhesion Molecules Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 1 Cochlea Epidermal Growth Factor Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Fibronectins Frameshift Mutation Gene Expression Genes, Recessive Glycosylation Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Laminin Male Molecular Sequence Data Pedigree Retina Retinitis Pigmentosa Syndrome Tumor Cells, Cultured || Usher syndrome type IIa (OMIM 276901), an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss and progressive retinitis pigmentosa, maps to the long arm of human chromosome 1q41 between markers AFM268ZD1 and AFM144XF2. Three biologically important mutations in Usher syndrome type IIa patients were identified in a gene (USH2A) isolated from this critical region. The USH2A gene encodes a protein with a predicted size of 171.5 kilodaltons that has laminin epidermal growth factor and fibronectin type III motifs; these motifs are most commonly observed in proteins comprising components of the basal lamina and extracellular matrixes and in cell adhesion molecules.",2 1 3
"Mutations in the PDS gene in German families with Pendred's syndrome: V138F is a founder mutation. || Adolescent Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence Carrier Proteins Child Child, Preschool Female Founder Effect Germany Haplotypes Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Hypothyroidism Infant, Newborn Male Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation, Missense Pedigree Serine Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Threonine Turkey || Pendred's syndrome, an autosomal-recessive condition characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing loss and goiter, is caused by mutations in the PDS gene. Located on chromosome 7q22-q31, it encodes a chloride-iodide transporter expressed in the thyroid, inner ear, and kidney. We investigated the PDS gene of six affected individuals from four unrelated families with Pendred's syndrome by direct sequencing. PDS mutations were identified in homozygous or compound heterozygous state in all six cases. A homozygous missense mutation leading to the amino acid substitution S133T was detected in a family of Turkish origin. The mutations found in the other affected individuals, who originate from Germany, were V138F/Y530H, V138F/E384G, and V138F/V138F. Because V138F was found in the German patients with Pendred's syndrome on at least one allele, we genotyped five microsatellite markers located in the PDS region. All affected German individuals shared a common haplotype at three microsatellite markers located close to or within the PDS gene. We therefore concluded that V138F is a founder mutation in our cohort of German families with Pendred's syndrome.",2 1 3
"Glycogenosis type II: a juvenile-specific mutation with an unusual splicing pattern and a shared mutation in African Americans. ||  || The recessively inherited deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) called Glycogenosis Type II is expressed as three different phenotypes: infantile, juvenile, and adult. At the molecular level, infantile and adult forms of the disease have been extensively studied, but little is known regarding the genetic defects associated with the juvenile form. We describe a novel mutation that defines the intermediate juvenile phenotype in a compound heterozygous patient. A transversion of t to g in intron 6 at position -22 creates a cryptic acceptor site and results in unusual splicing abnormality: insertion of 21 nucleotides of the intronic sequence into mRNA and removal of exon 6 without disruption of the reading frame. The second mutation, Arg854Stop in exon 18, had been previously identified in another African-American patient (Hermans et al., 1993a). Family study indicates that a silent allele harboring the Arg854Stop mutation in our patient is inherited from the patient's father, who is also African-American, thus suggesting a common mutation in this population.",1
"[Enzyme replacement therapy in a boy with infantile Pompe disease: cardiac follow-up]. || Age Factors Bundle-Branch Block Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Echocardiography Electrocardiography Follow-Up Studies Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Stroke Volume Time Factors Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive glycogen storage disorder caused by acid-alpha-glucosidase deficiency. The infantile form is usually fatal by 1 year of age in the absence of specific therapy. We report the cardiac follow-up of a 4-month-old boy treated with enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) for 8 months. The patient had no cardiac failure at the age of 1 year. Before starting ERT, ECG showed a shortened PR interval, with huge QRS complexes and biventricular hypertrophy; echocardiography demonstrated major hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The QRS voltage (SV1+RV6) decreased from 13 to 2.9 mV after 32 weeks of ERT, suggesting a progressive reduction of cardiac hypertrophy and intracellular glycogen excess. The PR interval increased from 60 to 90 ms. A block of the right bundle branch appeared after 13 weeks of treatment. The indexed left ventricular mass decreased from 240 to 90 g/m2 after 30 weeks of ERT. The left ventricular ejection fraction decreased transitorily between the 5th and the 15 th weeks of treatment. In summary, ERT is an efficient therapeutic approach for the cardiomyopathy of infantile Pompe disease. However, the possible occurrence of a right bundle branch block and a transitory alteration in the ejection fraction highlight the importance of cardiac follow-up.",1
"PKU mutation (D143G) associated with an apparent high residual enzyme activity: expression of a kinetic variant form of phenylalanine hydroxylase in three different systems. ||  || We have used three complementary in vitro systems to express the human phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene at high levels. Recombinant PAH was expressed in Escherichia coli (as a fusion protein), in human kidney cells and in a cell-free in vitro transcription-translation system. These systems were used to characterize a novel kinetic variant form (D143G) of the enzyme. The recombinant D143G mutant enzyme had the same physicochemical properties as the wild-type PAH and was stable when expressed in eukaryotic cells. Enzyme activity studies of the D143G mutant enzyme, produced in the three expression systems, revealed a kinetic variant form with reduced affinity for L-Phe (about 2.4-fold increase in the S0.5 value) as well as reduced affinity for tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) (about 2-fold increase in the apparent Km). At standard assay conditions (1 mM L-Phe, t5 microM BH4) the residual activity of the mutant enzyme was high and variable (52%, 33%, and 102%) when analysed in the three different systems. The high residual activities of the mutant enzyme obtained at these conditions were not in agreement with the classical PKU phenotype found in a patient compound heterozygous for the termination mutation G272X and the novel D143G mutation. However, when the D143G mutant enzyme was assayed at lower concentrations of L-Phe (100-300 microM) and BH4 (10 microM) the residual activities were compatible with severely reduced hydroxylation of L-Phe and the classical PKU phenotype.",3 1 0
"Glycogen storage disease type II: identification of a dinucleotide deletion and a common missense mutation in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene. ||  || In nine Dutch patients with the infantile form of glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII), who were compound heterozygous for either 525delT or exon18del (1), sequence analysis was performed to search for the mutations in the second lysosomal alpha-glucosidase allele. One patient had a novel TG deletion at cDNA position 379 + 380. Surprisingly five of the nine patients had the same two base pair changes: A921 --> T and G925 --> A. The first change is a well-known polymorphism but the second one is a novel mutation and results in the substitution of Gly309 by Arg. By screening 43 other GSDII patients the same mutation was found in two other cases, one from The Netherlands and one from France. To verify its deleterious effect, the mutation was introduced in the wild type lysosomal alpha-glucosidase cDNA and expressed in COS cells.",1 0
"Five novel mutations and two large deletions in a population analysis of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. || Alleles Base Sequence Biopterin Gene Frequency Gene Order Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Hydrogen Bonding Models, Molecular Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Prognosis Protein Conformation Registries Sequence Deletion || Mutational spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency was investigated in 107 families (90% of the Slovene PKU population). The entire coding region of the PAH gene was analyzed with dHPLC to select the samples where subsequently the automated sequencing analysis was performed. MLPA analysis was performed to identify large deletions, which were later confirmed with long-range PCR. Correlations with patients' phenotypes and genotype-based predictions of BH(4)-responsiveness were assessed. Altogether, disease-causing mutations were identified on 209 alleles (detection rate 97.7%). A spectrum of 36 different disease-causing mutations was identified: 20 missense mutations (80% of the alleles), eight splicing mutations (13% of the alleles), one nonsense mutation (0.5% of the alleles), four small deletions with frame shift (6% of the alleles), one small insertion with frame shift (0.5% of the alleles), and two large deletions (2% of the alleles). The most frequent mutation was p.R408W in exon 12, representing 29% of the alleles, which is in concordance with other neighboring and/or Slavic PKU populations. Other common mutations were: p.R158Q, p.A403V, p.P281L and p.E390G, accounting for 9%, 7%, 7% and 7% of the alleles respectively. Five novel mutations were detected: c.43_44insAG, c.56_59+1delACAGG, p.V45A, p.L62P and p.R157S. Large deletion of exon 5 (EX5del955) was found in three patients and a deletion of exon 3 (EX3del4765) in one patient. A spectrum of 64 different genotypes was found, seven of them accounting for over than a third of all families. Among thirteen families with homozygous mutation (13% of the PKU population), 10 had p.R408W, two had p.R158Q and one had p.E390G. Among 107 families, 58 were classified as classic PKU (54.2%), 28 as mild PKU (25.9%) and 21 as MHP (19.6%). Twenty-six different genotypes (40.6%) were predicted to be BH(4)-responsive, represented by 38 different families (35.5%).",3 1
"Dependable and efficient clinical utility of target capture-based deep sequencing in molecular diagnosis of retinitis pigmentosa. || massively parallel sequencing next generation sequencing retinitis pigmentosa target gene enrichment || The purpose of this study was to establish a fully validated, high-throughput next-generation sequencing (NGS) approach for comprehensive, cost-effective, clinical molecular diagnosis of retinitis pigmentosa (RP). Target sequences of a panel of 66 genes known to cause all nonsyndromic and a few syndromic forms of RP were enriched by using custom-designed probe hybridization. A total of 939 coding exons and 20 bp of their flanking intron regions with a total of 202,800 bp of target sequences were captured, followed by massively parallel sequencing (MPS) on the Illumina HiSeq2000 device. Twelve samples with known mutations were used for test validation. We achieved an average sequence depth of ∼1000× per base. Exons with <20× insufficient coverage were completed by PCR/Sanger sequencing to ensure 100% coverage. We analyzed DNA from 65 unrelated RP patients and detected deleterious mutations in 53 patients with a diagnostic yield of ∼82%. Clinical validation and consistently deep coverage of individual exons allow for the accurate identification of all types of mutations including point mutations, exonic deletions, and large insertions. Our comprehensive MPS approach greatly improves diagnostic acumen for RP in a cost- and time-efficient manner.",1
"The impact of antibodies in late-onset Pompe disease: a case series and literature review. || Adult Age of Onset Antibodies Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Middle Aged Retrospective Studies alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II, GSD II) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by a deficiency of acid α-glucosidase (GAA), leading to lysosomal glycogen accumulation in various tissues, most notably cardiac, skeletal and smooth muscle. While both infantile and late-onset patients have benefited greatly from alglucosidase alfa (Myozyme®) enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), a subgroup of patients does not demonstrate as pronounced a response as others. Various factors have been identified which may help predict the response to ERT in infantile Pompe disease patients. High, sustained antibody titers (HSAT) have been correlated with poor response to ERT in infantile Pompe cases. However, the literature on the role of antibodies in the late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) population is limited. Our literature review highlights the need for studies to explore the potential impact of antibodies in LOPD. Further supporting the importance of this issue, our retrospective chart review of sixty LOPD patients revealed that six of these sixty (10%) LOPD patients developed HSAT of ≥1:51,200 on two or more occasions at or beyond 6 months on ERT. Here, we present a series of three of these six LOPD patients for whom detailed antibody data and clinical data were available for greater than 1 year on ERT. These three patients developed HSAT corresponding with clinical decline as demonstrated by pulmonary function, quality of life, and motor function testing, affirming the development of HSAT in a subset of patients with LOPD, and its potentially negative impact on clinical response to ERT. The findings of our study and literature review lead us to conclude that there is a strong indication for systematic studies to accurately delineate the potential impact of antibodies in LOPD.",3 1
"Next generation deep sequencing corrects diagnostic pitfalls of traditional molecular approach in a patient with prenatal onset of Pompe disease. || Exons Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Heterozygote High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Infant Male Pathology, Molecular Point Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is a rare inherited metabolic disorder of glycogen metabolism caused by mutations in the GAA gene, encoding the acid α-1,4 glucosidase. Successful diagnosis of Pompe disease is achieved by clinical and biochemical evaluation followed by confirmation with DNA testing. Here, we report a male infant with a prenatal onset of cardiac symptoms and enzyme testing consistent with Pompe disease, but DNA testing by Sanger sequencing revealed no pathogenic variants. Due to the strong indication from clinical, enzymatic, and histological studies (despite the absence of molecular confirmation by traditional Sanger sequencing), enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) for Pompe disease was initiated. Reanalysis of the patient's DNA sample using next generation sequencing (NGS) of a panel of target genes causing glycogen storage disorders demonstrated compound heterozygosity for a point mutation and an exonic deletion in the GAA gene. This case illustrates the value of astute clinical judgement in patient management as well as the power of target capture deep NGS in the simultaneous detection of both a point mutation and a heterozygous exonic deletion by correcting pitfalls of the traditional PCR based sequencing, namely; allele dropout and the inability to detect exonic deletions.",1
"Mutation profile of all 49 exons of the human myosin VIIA gene, and haplotype analysis, in Usher 1B families from diverse origins. || Amino Acid Substitution Blindness Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 11 Deafness Exons Family Genetic Markers Haplotypes Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Mutation Myosins Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic Retinitis Pigmentosa Sequence Deletion Syndrome Vestibular Diseases || Usher syndrome types I (USH1A-USH1E) are a group of autosomal recessive diseases characterized by profound congenital hearing loss, vestibular areflexia, and progressive visual loss due to retinitis pigmentosa. The human myosin VIIA gene, located on 11q14, has been shown to be responsible for Usher syndrome type 1B (USH1B). Haplotypes were constructed in 28 USH1 families by use of the following polymorphic markers spanning the USH1B locus: D11S787, D11S527, D11S1789, D11S906, D11S4186, and OMP. Affected individuals and members of their families from 12 different ethnic origins were screened for the presence of mutations in all 49 exons of the myosin VIIA gene. In 15 families myosin VIIA mutations were detected, verifying their classification as USH1B. All these mutations are novel, including three missense mutations, one premature stop codon, two splicing mutations, one frameshift, and one deletion of >2 kb comprising exons 47 and 48, a part of exon 49, and the introns between them. Three mutations were shared by more than one family, consistent with haplotype similarities. Altogether, 16 USH1B haplotypes were observed in the 15 families; most haplotypes were population specific. Several exonic and intronic polymorphisms were also detected. None of the 20 known USH1B mutations reported so far in other world populations were identified in our families.",2 1
"Unusual cardiac ""masses"" in a newborn with infantile pompe disease. ||  || Glycogen storage disease type II (OMIM #232300), or Pompe disease, may present in the newborn period with moderate-to-severe biventricular hypertrophy with or without left ventricular outflow tract obstruction that typically leads to death from cardiorespiratory failure in the first year of life. Glycogen deposition tends to be uniform, and is only occasionally accompanied by patchy areas of fibrosis. Here, we present an infant identified with biventricular hypertrophy and cardiac masses by prenatal ultrasound. Postnatal molecular studies did not support the diagnosis of tuberous sclerosis in this case. Additional evaluation for infantile hypertrophic cardiomyopathy confirmed the diagnosis of Pompe disease. We discuss whether the ""cardiac masses,"" which brought this infant to medical attention and facilitated an early diagnosis of Pompe disease, may represent an unusual manifestation of GSD type II or the coincidental occurrence of an unrelated disease process.",1
"Connexin 26 mutations in hereditary non-syndromic sensorineural deafness. || Aged Chromosomes, Human, Pair 13 Cochlea Connexin 26 Connexins DNA Mutational Analysis Deafness Female Haplotypes Humans Immunohistochemistry Male Pedigree Phenotype Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Syndrome || Severe deafness or hearing impairment is the most prevalent inherited sensory disorder, affecting about 1 in 1,000 children. Most deafness results from peripheral auditory defects that occur as a consequence of either conductive (outer or middle ear) or sensorineuronal (cochlea) abnormalities. Although a number of mutant genes have been identified that are responsible for syndromic (multiple phenotypic disease) deafness such as Waardenburg syndrome and Usher 1B syndrome, little is known about the genetic basis of non-syndromic (single phenotypic disease) deafness. Here we study a pedigree containing cases of autosomal dominant deafness and have identified a mutation in the gene encoding the gap-junction protein connexin 26 (Cx26) that segregates with the profound deafness in the family. Cx26 mutations resulting in premature stop codons were also found in three autosomal recessive non-syndromic sensorineuronal deafness pedigrees, genetically linked to chromosome 13q11-12 (DFNB1), where the Cx26 gene is localized. Immunohistochemical staining of human cochlear cells for Cx26 demonstrated high levels of expression. To our knowledge, this is the first non-syndromic sensorineural autosomal deafness susceptibility gene to be identified, which implicates Cx26 as an important component of the human cochlea.",1
"Panel-based next generation sequencing as a reliable and efficient technique to detect mutations in unselected patients with retinal dystrophies. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Exons Extracellular Matrix Proteins Eye Proteins Genetic Predisposition to Disease High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Mutation Pathology, Molecular Pedigree Retinal Dystrophies Retinitis Pigmentosa Sequence Analysis, DNA Usher Syndromes || Hereditary retinal dystrophies (RD) constitute a group of blinding diseases that are characterized by clinical variability and pronounced genetic heterogeneity. The different forms of RD can be caused by mutations in >100 genes, including >1600 exons. Consequently, next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies are among the most promising approaches to identify mutations in RD. So far, NGS is not routinely used in gene diagnostics. We developed a diagnostic NGS pipeline to identify mutations in 170 genetically and clinically unselected RD patients. NGS was applied to 105 RD-associated genes. Underrepresented regions were examined by Sanger sequencing. The NGS approach was successfully established using cases with known sequence alterations. Depending on the initial clinical diagnosis, we identified likely causative mutations in 55% of retinitis pigmentosa and 80% of Bardet-Biedl or Usher syndrome cases. Seventy-one novel mutations in 40 genes were newly associated with RD. The genes USH2A, EYS, ABCA4, and RHO were more frequently affected than others. Occasionally, cases carried mutations in more than one RD-associated gene. In addition, we found possible dominant de-novo mutations in cases with sporadic RD, which implies consequences for counseling of patients and families. NGS-based mutation analyses are reliable and cost-efficient approaches in gene diagnostics of genetically heterogeneous diseases like RD.",1 4
Phenylketonuria in Spanish Gypsies: prevalence of the IVS10nt546 mutation on haplotype 34. ||  || ,3 1
"Comprehensive Rare Variant Analysis via Whole-Genome Sequencing to Determine the Molecular Pathology of Inherited Retinal Disease. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Alleles Base Sequence Choroideremia DNA Mutational Analysis Ethnic Groups Exome Female Genes, Recessive Genetic Variation Genome, Human Humans Introns Male Mutation Rare Diseases Retinal Diseases || Inherited retinal disease is a common cause of visual impairment and represents a highly heterogeneous group of conditions. Here, we present findings from a cohort of 722 individuals with inherited retinal disease, who have had whole-genome sequencing (n = 605), whole-exome sequencing (n = 72), or both (n = 45) performed, as part of the NIHR-BioResource Rare Diseases research study. We identified pathogenic variants (single-nucleotide variants, indels, or structural variants) for 404/722 (56%) individuals. Whole-genome sequencing gives unprecedented power to detect three categories of pathogenic variants in particular: structural variants, variants in GC-rich regions, which have significantly improved coverage compared to whole-exome sequencing, and variants in non-coding regulatory regions. In addition to previously reported pathogenic regulatory variants, we have identified a previously unreported pathogenic intronic variant in CHM in two males with choroideremia. We have also identified 19 genes not previously known to be associated with inherited retinal disease, which harbor biallelic predicted protein-truncating variants in unsolved cases. Whole-genome sequencing is an increasingly important comprehensive method with which to investigate the genetic causes of inherited retinal disease.",3 1 4
"Analysis of the genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with phenylketonuria in mainland China. ||  || Mutations in the gene encoding phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) are associated with various degrees of phenylketonuria (PKU). The aim of our study was to define the genotype-phenotype correlations of mutations in the PAH gene that cause phenylketonuria (PKU) among the Chinese mainland population. Mutations in the PAH gene were analysed by next-generation sequencing, and a genotype-phenotype correlation analysis was performed in 1079 patients. Fifteen ""null + null"" genotypes, including four homoallelic and eleven heteroallelic genotypes, were clearly associated with classic PKU. Five functionally hemizygous (p.E280K, p.R252Q, p.E56D, p.S310F and p.T372R) and four compound heterozygous (p.T278I/p.S359L, p.R408W/p.R243Q, p.F161S/p.R243Q and p.F161S/p.R413P) genotypes were clearly associated with classic PKU. Ten functionally hemizygous genotypes, p.G257V, p.R158W, p.L255S, p.G247V, p.F161S, p.R158Q, p.V388M, p.I65T, p.I324N and p.R400K, were frequently associated with classic PKU. Three functionally hemizygous genotypes, p.P147L, p.I95del and p.F331S, and four compound heterozygous genotypes, p.G257V/p.R408Q, p.A434D/p.R413P, p.R243Q/p.A47E and p.R241C/p.G239D, were consistently correlated with mild PKU. Three functionally hemizygous genotypes, p.H107R, p.Q419R and p.F392I, and nine compound heterozygous genotypes (p.G312V/p.R241C, p.R243Q/p.V230I, p.R243Q/p.A403V, p.R243Q/p.Q419R, p.R243Q/p.R53H, p.R243Q/p.H107R, p.R241C/p.R408Q, p.R241C/p.H220P and p.R53H/p.R400K) were consistent with mild hyperphenylalaninaemia (MHP). Our study provides further support for the hypothesis that the PAH genotype is the main factor that determines the phenotype of PKU.",3 1
"Neuroradiological findings of an adolescent with early treated phenylketonuria: is phenylalanine restriction enough? ||  || Phenylketonuria is caused by mutations in the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase gene, that can result in abnormal concentrations of phenylalanine on blood, resulting in metabolites that can cause brain damage. The treatment is based on dietary restriction of phenylalanine, and noncompliance with treatment may result in damage of the brain function. Brain abnormalities can be seen on magnetic resonance imaging of these individuals. Studies indicate that the appearance of abnormalities in white matter reflects high levels of phenylalanine on the blood. This case will show the clinical and neuroradiological aspects of a teenager with constant control of phenylalanine levels. Despite the continuous monitoring and early treatment, the magnetic resonance imaging identified impressive abnormalities in the white matter. This leads us to one question: is the restriction of phenylalanine sufficient to prevent changes in the white matter in patients with phenylketonuria?",1
"Sleep disordered breathing in childhood-onset acid maltase deficiency. || Adolescent Blood Gas Analysis Child Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Muscle Strength Muscle Weakness Polysomnography Positive-Pressure Respiration Quality of Life Respiration Respiration Disorders Respiratory Function Tests Retrospective Studies Sleep Sleep Apnea Syndromes || To clarify the feature of sleep disordered breathing (SDB) associated with childhood-onset acid maltase deficiency (AMD): the progressive nature of SDB and the stage of AMD. We retrospectively studied 4 patients with childhood-onset AMD by analyzing the results of neurological examinations for muscle wasting and muscle strength and the data on venous gas and from a pulmonary function test and nocturnal polysomnography (PSG). Three out of the 4 patients showed muscular symptoms including myalgia, lordoscoliosis, muscle wasting and muscle weakness. They also complained of sleep-related symptoms such as tiredness in the morning and daytime sleepiness. All of them showed SDB by PSG, even in a patient in the earliest stage who exhibited no signs or symptoms of muscle weakness. In 3 patients, noninvasive intermittent positive pressure ventilation during sleep was introduced; and thereafter sleep-related symptoms were resolved and no lower respiratory infection reoccurred. Although their quality of life was improved, no improvement of respiratory function was shown by spirometry over a 2-year follow-up period. SDB seems to be common in childhood-onset AMD, which is not always accompanied by daytime muscular symptoms, especially in mild patients. PSG should be utilized for detecting SDB, which could be one of the earliest signs of respiratory muscle involvement in childhood-onset AMD.",1
"Evaluation of neonatal BH4 loading test in neonates screened for hyperphenylalaninemia. || Biopterin Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Mass Screening Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || The outcome in phenylketonuria is related to the early diagnosis and management due to neonatal screening. To assess the interest of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) loading test and phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotyping in the management of neonates with hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA). We evaluate the effectiveness of a BH4 loading test (20 mg/kg) in ten neonates screened for HPA. We evaluated the time required to reach a target plasma Phenylalanine (Phe) level below 300 micromol/l. We compared these ten BH4-loaded patients to the 10 previous neonates non-loaded with BH4. In all these patients, the PAH genotype was determined. One loaded patient had biopterin synthesis deficiency and has been retrieved from statistical analysis. All others patients have PAH deficiency. Between the BH4 loaded group (L) and the BH4 non-loaded group (NL), a statistically significant difference was observed in the average time required to reached the target Phe level (13.56 +/- 4.30 (L) vs. 20.6 +/- 7.59 days (NL) [p < 0.02]). Results of the genotyping from all but one of these 19 patients indicated that among all mutations present in this patient population, there were 4 known PAH mutations associated with BH4 responsiveness (p.R261Q, the p.V388 M, the p.E390G and the p.Y414C). These mutations were found in 4 non-loaded and 6 loaded patients. Two patients had a more than 90% reduction in their plasma Phe level within 24 h after the load. One of these patients had a PTPS deficiency. The other fully responsive patient (p.Y414C and IVS10-11G>A) has been treated with BH4 from birth with an excellent metabolic control for three years now. BH4 loading test improves the management of HPA. It allows an immediate identification of the children fully responsive to BH4. Our results therefore suggest the incorporation of BH4 loading test in the management of neonates screened for HPA.",3 1
"Long-term treatment and diagnosis of tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive hyperphenylalaninemia with a mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. || Biopterin Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || A novel therapeutic strategy for phenylketonuria (PKU) has been initiated in Japan. A total of 12 patients who met the criteria for tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4))-responsive hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) with a mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) (EC 1.14.16.1) gene were recruited at 12 medical centers in Japan between June 1995 and July 2001. Therapeutic efficacy of BH(4) was evaluated in single-dose, four-dose, and 1-wk BH(4) loading tests followed by long-term BH(4) treatment, and also examined in relation to the PAH gene mutations. The endpoints were determined as the percentage decline in serum phenylalanine from initial values after single-dose (>20%), four-dose (>30%), and 1-wk BH(4) (>50%) loading tests. Patients with mild PKU exhibiting decreases in blood phenylalanine concentrations of >20% in the single-dose test also demonstrated decreases of >30% in the four-dose test. The 1-wk test elicited BH(4) responsiveness even in patients with poor responses in the shorter tests. Patients with mild HPA, many of whom carry the R241C allele, responded to BH(4) administration. No clear correlation was noted between the degree of decrease in serum phenylalanine concentrations in the single- or four-dose tests and specific PAH mutations. The 1-wk test (20 mg/kg of BH(4) per day) is the most sensitive test for the diagnosis of BH(4)-responsive PAH deficiency. Responsiveness apparently depends on mutations in the PAH gene causing mild PKU, such as R241C. BH(4) proved to be an effective therapy that may be able to replace or liberalize the phenylalanine-restricted diets for a considerable number of patients with mild PKU.",3 1 0
"The identification of five novel mutations in the lysosomal acid a-(1-4) glucosidase gene from patients with glycogen storage disease type II. Mutations in brief no. 134. Online. ||  || The autosomal recessive disorder Glycogen Storage Type II (GSDII) is caused by a deficiency in the lysosomal enzyme acid alpha-glucosidase. We have optimised a procedure to use fluorescent DNA sequencing technology to screen for mutations within the alpha-glucosidase gene from UK patients with GSDII. Five previously unknown mutations in six patients (4 early onset infantile and 2 late adult) have been found. The mutations are an insertion of a C residue in exon 2 (InsC258), an insertion of a G residue in exon 16 (InsG2242), a deletion of 20 nucleotides in exon 4 delta, and a nonsense mutation in exon 16 (G2237A-Trp746Stop). All will result in the introduction of a premature stop codon in the coding region, predicting a truncated and non-functional protein. The final mutation is a duplication of 18 nucleotides in exon 19 (Ins18nt2776) and will result in the insertion of an additional six amino acids into the protein chain after Asn925 (Gly-Val-Pro-Val-Ser-Asn).",1
"Mutation analysis of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in Azerbaijani population, a report from West Azerbaijan province of Iran. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a genetic inborn error of phenylalanine (Phe) metabolism resulting from insufficiency in the hepatic enzyme, phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), which leads to elevated levels of Phe in the blood. The present study was carried out for mutation analysis of the PAH gene in West Azerbaijan province of Iran. A total of 218 alleles from 40 PKU families were studied using restriction fragment length polymorphism-polymerase chain reaction (RFLP-PCR) method. The frequencies of IVS10-11, S67P, R261Q, R252W, IVS11nt-1 g>c, R408Q, and Q232Q mutations were 28(35), 17(21.25), 15(18.75), 3(3.75), 3(3.75), 2(2.5), and 1(1.25), in cases group, and 51(23.4), 31(14.2), 27(12.4), 6(2.75), 6(2.75), 4(1.83), and 2(0.92) in total group, respectively. The mutations of R243Q, 364delG, L333F, 261X, I65T, and R408W were not detected in our samples. It can be concluded that the IVS10-11 mutation has the highest frequency in the tested population. To our knowledge, this report is the first in its own kind and provides better understanding of the genetic heterogeneity, the origin and distributions of PAH mutations in West Azerbaijan province of Iran.",1
"Mutation spectrum of MYO7A and evaluation of a novel nonsyndromic deafness DFNB2 allele with residual function. ||  || Recessive mutations of MYO7A, encoding unconventional myosin VIIA, can cause either a deaf-blindness syndrome (type 1 Usher syndrome; USH1B) or nonsyndromic deafness (DFNB2). In our study, deafness segregating as a recessive trait in 24 consanguineous families showed linkage to markers for the DFNB2/USH1B locus on chromosome 11q13.5. A total of 23 of these families segregate USH1 due to 17 homozygous mutant MYO7A alleles, of which 14 are novel. One family segregated nonsyndromic hearing loss DFNB2 due to a novel three-nucleotide deletion in an exon of MYO7A (p.E1716del) encoding a region of the tail domain. We hypothesized that DFNB2 alleles of MYO7A have residual myosin VIIA. To address this question we investigated the effects of several mutant alleles by making green fluorescent protein (GFP) tagged cDNA expression constructs containing engineered mutations of mouse Myo7a at codons equivalent to pathogenic USH1B and DFNB2 alleles of human MYO7A. We show that in transfected mouse hair cells an USH1B mutant GFP-myosin VIIa does not localize properly to inner ear hair cell stereocilia. However, a GFP-myosin VIIa protein engineered to have an equivalent DFNB2 mutation to p.E1716del localizes correctly in transfected mouse hair cells. This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that p.E1716del causes a less severe phenotype (DFNB2) than the USH1B-associated alleles because the resulting protein retains some degree of normal function.",1
"Recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase (rhGAA) in adult patients with severe respiratory failure due to Pompe disease. || Adult Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Middle Aged Muscle Strength Prospective Studies Recombinant Proteins Respiratory Function Tests Respiratory Insufficiency Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is a rare metabolic myopathy caused by lysosomal α-glucosidase deficiency. Pompe disease ranges from a rapidly progressive course when symptoms present in infancy to a more slowly progressive rate when symptoms present in childhood or adulthood. This open-label prospective exploratory study investigated the effect of 12 months of recombinant enzyme replacement therapy in 5 adult patients who had already advanced to a very severe stage of Pompe disease. Muscular and respiratory function, quantitative muscle testing and spirometry were assessed. Four patients were tracheostomized. Respiratory parameters did not deteriorate. A moderate improvement in sitting/supine slow vital capacity in 2 patients (from 7% to 11% and 28% to 32% of predicted) and reductions of ventilation support in 2 patients was observed. Three patients, wheelchair bound at baseline, improved sitting and proximal motor function; 2 patients improved in their ability to stand and transfer. The treatment was well tolerated. Alglucosidase alfa may stabilize or even slightly improve muscle strength and respiratory function among patients with severe Pompe disease.",1
"Prevalence of Deafness-Associated Connexin-26 (GJB2) and Connexin-30 (GJB6) Pathogenic Alleles in a Large Patient Cohort from Eastern Sicily. ||  || Mutations in the gene encoding the gap junction protein connexin 26 (GJB2) and connexin 30 (GJB6) have been shown to be a major contributor to prelingual, sensorineural, nonsyndromic deafness. The aim of this study was to characterize and establish the prevalence of GJB2 and GJB6 gene alterations in 196 patients affected by sensorineural, nonsyndromic hearing loss, from Eastern Sicily. We performed sequence analysis of GJB2 and identified sequence variants in 68 out of 196 patients (34.7%); (28 homozygous for c.35delG, 22 compound heterozygous and 11 with only one variant allele). We found 12 different allelic variants, the most prevalent being c.35delG, which was found on 89 chromosomes (65.5%), followed by other alleles with different frequencies (p.E47X, c.-23+1G>A, p.L90P, p.R184W, p.M34T, c.167delT, p.R127H, p.M163V, p.V153I, p.W24X, and p.T8M). Importantly, for the first time we present the frequency and spectrum of GJB2 mutations in NSHL patients from Eastern Sicily. No alterations were found in the GJB6 gene, confirming that alterations in this gene are uncommon in our geographic area. Note that 65.3% and 23.5% of our patients, respectively were found to be negative or carriers by GJB2 molecular screening. This emphasizes the need to broaden the genetic analysis to other genes involved in hearing loss.",1
"Transcriptional control of SLC26A4 is involved in Pendred syndrome and nonsyndromic enlargement of vestibular aqueduct (DFNB4). || Alleles Amino Acid Sequence Animals Binding Sites COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops Conserved Sequence Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay Female Forkhead Transcription Factors Genes, Reporter Genetic Testing Hearing Loss Heterozygote Humans Luciferases Membrane Transport Proteins Mice Models, Genetic Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Promoter Regions, Genetic Protein Binding Protein Structure, Tertiary Sequence Homology, Amino Acid Siblings Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Trans-Activators Transcription, Genetic Vestibular Aqueduct || Although recessive mutations in the anion transporter gene SLC26A4 are known to be responsible for Pendred syndrome (PS) and nonsyndromic hearing loss associated with enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA), also known as ""DFNB4,"" a large percentage of patients with this phenotype lack mutations in the SLC26A4 coding region in one or both alleles. We have identified and characterized a key transcriptional regulatory element in the SLC26A4 promoter that binds FOXI1, a transcriptional activator of SLC26A4. In nine patients with PS or nonsyndromic EVA, a novel c.-103T-->C mutation in this regulatory element interferes with FOXI1 binding and completely abolishes FOXI1-mediated transcriptional activation. We have also identified six patients with mutations in FOXI1 that compromise its ability to activate SLC26A4 transcription. In one family, the EVA phenotype segregates in a double-heterozygous mode in the affected individual who carries single mutations in both SLC26A4 and FOXI1. This finding is consistent with our observation that EVA occurs in the Slc26a4(+/-); Foxi1(+/-) double-heterozygous mouse mutant. These results support a novel dosage-dependent model for the molecular pathogenesis of PS and nonsyndromic EVA that involves SLC26A4 and its transcriptional regulatory machinery.",1 0
"Cross-reactive immunologic material status affects treatment outcomes in Pompe disease infants. || Cross Reactions Enzyme Replacement Therapy Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunoglobulin G Infant Male Muscle Strength Recombinant Proteins Retrospective Studies Treatment Outcome alpha-Galactosidase || Deficiency of acid alpha glucosidase (GAA) causes Pompe disease, which is usually fatal if onset occurs in infancy. Patients synthesize a non-functional form of GAA or are unable to form native enzyme. Enzyme replacement therapy with recombinant human GAA (rhGAA) prolongs survival in infantile Pompe patients but may be less effective in cross-reactive immunologic material (CRIM)-negative patients. We retrospectively analyzed the influence of CRIM status on outcome in 21 CRIM-positive and 11 CRIM-negative infantile Pompe patients receiving rhGAA. Patients were from the clinical setting and from clinical trials of rhGAA, were 6 months of age, were not invasively ventilated, and were treated with IV rhGAA at a cumulative or total dose of 20 or 40 mg/kg/2 weeks. Outcome measures included survival, invasive ventilator-free survival, cardiac status, gross motor development, development of antibodies to rhGAA, and levels of urinary Glc(4). Following 52 weeks of treatment, 6/11 (54.5%) CRIM-negative and 1/21 (4.8%) CRIM-positive patients were deceased or invasively ventilated (p<0.0001). By age 27.1 months, all CRIM-negative patients and 4/21 (19.0%) CRIM-positive patients were deceased or invasively ventilated. Cardiac function and gross motor development improved significantly more in the CRIM-positive group. IgG antibodies to rhGAA developed earlier and serotiters were higher and more sustained in the CRIM-negative group. CRIM-negative status predicted reduced overall survival and invasive ventilator-free survival and poorer clinical outcomes in infants with Pompe disease treated with rhGAA. The effect of CRIM status on outcome appears to be mediated by antibody responses to the exogenous protein.",3 1 4
"Molecular genetics of late onset glycogen storage disease II in Italy. ||  || Glycogen Storage Disease Type II (GSDII) is a recessively inherited disorder due to the deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) that results in glycogen accumulation in the lysosomes. The molecular analysis of the GAA gene was performed on 45 Italian patients with late onset GSDII. DHPLC analysis revealed 28 polymorphisms spread all over the GAA gene. Direct sequencing identified the 96% of the mutant alleles, 12 of which are novel. Missense mutations were functionally characterized by enzyme activity and protein processing in a human GAA deficient cell line while splicing mutations were studied by RT-PCR and in silico analysis. A complex allele was also identified carrying three different alterations in cis. All the patients studied carried a severe mutation in combination with a milder one, which explains the late onset of the disease. The c.-32-13T > G was the most frequent mutation, present as compound heterozygote in 85% of the patients as described in other late onset GSDII Caucasian populations. Interestingly, 10 of the 45 patients carried the c.-32-13T > G associated to the severe c.2237G > A (p.W746X) mutation. However, despite the common genotype, patients presented with a wide variability in residual enzyme activity, age of appearance of clinical signs and rate of disease progression, suggesting that other genetic/environment factors may modulate clinical presentation.",1
"Time and space clusters of the French-Canadian M1V phenylketonuria mutation in France. ||  || We performed mutation analysis and RFLP haplotype analysis of chromosomes associated with classical phenylketonuria (PKU) in contemporary French families. We also did genealogical reconstructions for seven obligate carriers in five contemporary French-Canadian families living in eastern Quebec, who carry the M1V mutation causing PKU. The M1V mutation, heretofore considered to be associated exclusively with French-Canadians, was found on 4 of 152 independent French chromosomes. The French and Quebec M1V mutations all occurred on RFLP haplotype 2. The contemporary mutant French chromosomes clustered in southern Brittany (Finistère Sud). Genealogical reconstructions of the Quebec families identified 53 shared ancestors and a center of diffusion in the Perche region in 17th century France. The two clusters in France, one historical and the other contemporary, are not incompatible, if one assumes the possibilities that settlers returned from Nouvelle France or moved from Perche to southern Brittany. The M1V mutation is serving as a useful marker for historical demography.",1
"Both rare and common genetic variants contribute to autism in the Faroe Islands. ||  || The number of genes associated with autism is increasing, but few studies have been performed on epidemiological cohorts and in isolated populations. Here, we investigated 357 individuals from the Faroe Islands including 36 individuals with autism, 136 of their relatives and 185 non-autism controls. Data from SNP array and whole exome sequencing revealed that individuals with autism had a higher burden of rare exonic copy-number variants altering autism associated genes (deletions (p= 0.0352) or duplications (p= 0.0352)), higher inbreeding status (p= 0.023) and a higher load of rare homozygous deleterious variants (p= 0.011) compared to controls. Our analysis supports the role of several genes/loci associated with autism (e.g.,NRXN1,ADNP, 22q11 deletion) and identified new truncating (e.g., GRIK2,ROBO1, NINL, andIMMP2L) or recessive deleterious variants (e.g., KIRREL3 andCNTNAP2) affecting autism-associated genes. It also revealed three genes involved in synaptic plasticity,RIMS4,KALRN, andPLA2G4A, carrying de novo deleterious variants in individuals with autism without intellectual disability. In summary, our analysis provides a better understanding of the genetic architecture of autism in isolated populations by highlighting the role of both common and rare gene variants and pointing at new autism-risk genes. It also indicates that more knowledge about how multiple genetic hits affect neuronal function will be necessary to fully understand the genetic architecture of autism.",1
"Identification of five novel mutations in the long isoform of the USH2A gene in Chinese families with Usher syndrome type II. || Adolescent Amino Acid Sequence Asian Continental Ancestry Group Base Sequence Child China DNA Mutational Analysis Extracellular Matrix Proteins Family Female Fundus Oculi Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Protein Isoforms Sequence Alignment Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome type II (USH2) is the most common form of Usher syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by moderate to severe hearing loss, postpuberal onset of retinitis pigmentosa (RP), and normal vestibular function. Mutations in the USH2A gene have been shown to be responsible for most cases of USH2. To further elucidate the role of USH2A in USH2, mutation screening was undertaken in three Chinese families with USH2. Three unrelated Chinese families, consisting of six patients and 10 unaffected relatives, were examined clinically, and 100 normal Chinese individuals served as controls. Genomic DNA was extracted from the venous blood of all participants. The coding region (exons 2-72), including the intron-exon boundary of USH2A, was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The PCR products amplified from the three probands were analyzed using direct sequencing to screen sequence variants. Whenever substitutions were identified in a patient, restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis, or single strand conformation polymorphism analysis was performed on all available family members and the control group. Fundus examination revealed typical fundus features of RP, including narrowing of the vessels, bone-speckle pigmentation, and waxy optic discs. The ERG wave amplitudes of three probands were undetectable. Audiometric tests indicated moderate to severe sensorineural hearing impairment. Vestibular function was normal. Five novel mutations (one small insertion, one small deletion, one nonsense, one missense, and one splice site) were detected in three families after sequence analysis of USH2A. Of the five mutations, four were located in exons 22-72, specific to the long isoform of USH2A. The mutations found in our study broaden the spectrum of USH2A mutations. Our results further indicate that the long isoform of USH2A may harbor even more mutations of the USH2A gene.",2 1
"Identification of six novel mutations in the acid alpha-glucosidase gene in three Spanish patients with infantile onset glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe disease). || Age of Onset Alternative Splicing Amino Acid Sequence Amino Acid Substitution Animals Base Sequence Exons Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Lysosomes Male Mutation Sequence Alignment Spain alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II is an autosomal recessive muscle disorder due to deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase and the resulting intralysosomal accumulation of glycogen. We found six novel mutations in three Spanish classic infantile onset glycogen storage disease type II patients with involvement of both cardiac and skeletal muscle; three missense mutations (G219R, E262K, M408V), a nonsense mutation (Y191X), a donor splice site mutation (IVS18 +2gt>ga) and an in frame deletion of an asparagine residue (nt1408-1410). The missense mutations were not found in 100 normal chromosomes and therefore are not normal polymorphic variants. The splice site mutation was subsequently detected in an additional 'Spanish' infantile onset glycogen storage disease type II patient from El Salvador. Further studies will be required to determine if the IVS18 +2gt>ga splice site mutation might in fact be a relatively common Spanish mutation. Mutations among Spanish glycogen storage disease type II patients appear to be genetically heterogeneous and differ from common mutations in neighboring countries.",1
"Successful immune tolerance induction to enzyme replacement therapy in CRIM-negative infantile Pompe disease. || Antibodies B-Lymphocytes Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immune Tolerance Infant Infant, Newborn Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Neuroimaging Oligosaccharides Recombinant Proteins Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || Infantile Pompe disease resulting from a deficiency of lysosomal acid α-glucosidase (GAA) requires enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with recombinant human GAA (rhGAA). Cross-reactive immunologic material negative (CRIM-negative) Pompe patients develop high-titer antibody to the rhGAA and do poorly. We describe successful tolerance induction in CRIM-negative patients. Two CRIM-negative patients with preexisting anti-GAA antibodies were treated therapeutically with rituximab, methotrexate, and gammaglobulins. Two additional CRIM-negative patients were treated prophylactically with a short course of rituximab and methotrexate, in parallel with initiating rhGAA. In both patients treated therapeutically, anti-rhGAA was eliminated after 3 and 19 months. All four patients are immune tolerant to rhGAA, off immune therapy, showing B-cell recovery while continuing to receive ERT at ages 36 and 56 months (therapeutic) and 18 and 35 months (prophylactic). All patients show clinical response to ERT, in stark contrast to the rapid deterioration of their nontolerized CRIM-negative counterparts. The combination of rituximab with methotrexate ± intravenous gammaglobulins (IVIG) is an option for tolerance induction of CRIM-negative Pompe to ERT when instituted in the naïve setting or following antibody development. It should be considered in other conditions in which antibody response to the therapeutic protein elicits robust antibody response that interferes with product efficacy.",3 1
"Genotype-phenotype correlation in Pompe disease, a step forward. || Actinin Angiotensinogen Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Mutation PPAR alpha Peptidyl-Dipeptidase A Phenotype || Pompe's disease is a progressive myopathy caused by mutations in the lysosomal enzyme acid alphaglucosidase gene (GAA). A wide clinical variability occurs also in patients sharing the same GAA mutations, even within the same family. For a large series of GSDII patients we collected some clinical data as age of onset of the disease, presence or absence of muscular pain, Walton score, 6-Minute Walking Test, Vital Capacity, and Creatine Kinase. DNA was extracted and tested for GAA mutations and some genetic polymorphisms able to influence muscle properties (ACE, ACTN3, AGT and PPARα genes).We compared the polymorphisms analyzed in groups of patients with Pompe disease clustered for their homogeneous genotype. We have been able to identify four subgroups of patients completely homogeneous for their genotype, and two groups homogeneous as far as the second mutation is defined ""very severe"" or ""potentially less severe"". When disease free life was studied we observed a high significant difference between groups. The DD genotype in the ACE gene and the XX genotype in the ACTN3 gene were significantly associated to an earlier age of onset of the disease. The ACE DD genotype was also associated to the presence of muscle pain. We demonstrate that ACE and ACTN3 polymorphisms are genetic factors able to modulate the clinical phenotype of patients affected with Pompe disease.",1 0
"Comprehensive sequence analysis of nine Usher syndrome genes in the UK National Collaborative Usher Study. || Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Multifactorial Inheritance Mutation Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide United Kingdom Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome (USH) is an autosomal recessive disorder comprising retinitis pigmentosa, hearing loss and, in some cases, vestibular dysfunction. It is clinically and genetically heterogeneous with three distinctive clinical types (I-III) and nine Usher genes identified. This study is a comprehensive clinical and genetic analysis of 172 Usher patients and evaluates the contribution of digenic inheritance. The genes MYO7A, USH1C, CDH23, PCDH15, USH1G, USH2A, GPR98, WHRN, CLRN1 and the candidate gene SLC4A7 were sequenced in 172 UK Usher patients, regardless of clinical type. No subject had definite mutations (nonsense, frameshift or consensus splice site mutations) in two different USH genes. Novel missense variants were classified UV1-4 (unclassified variant): UV4 is 'probably pathogenic', based on control frequency <0.23%, identification in trans to a pathogenic/probably pathogenic mutation and segregation with USH in only one family; and UV3 ('likely pathogenic') as above, but no information on phase. Overall 79% of identified pathogenic/UV4/UV3 variants were truncating and 21% were missense changes. MYO7A accounted for 53.2%, and USH1C for 14.9% of USH1 families (USH1C:c.496+1G>A being the most common USH1 mutation in the cohort). USH2A was responsible for 79.3% of USH2 families and GPR98 for only 6.6%. No mutations were found in USH1G, WHRN or SLC4A7. One or two pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were identified in 86% of cases. No convincing cases of digenic inheritance were found. It is concluded that digenic inheritance does not make a significant contribution to Usher syndrome; the observation of multiple variants in different genes is likely to reflect polymorphic variation, rather than digenic effects.",2 1 3
"Mutations Ivs4nt1, 47delCT, and G148S identified in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene by RT-PCR of illegitimate transcripts and chemical cleavage of mismatch. ||  || ",3 1 0
"Analysis of exon 7 of the human phenylalanine hydroxylase gene: a mutation hot spot? ||  || Complete sequence analysis of 194 human phenylalanine hydroxylase genes from PKU patients originating from West Germany and Bulgaria revealed 13 different mutations within exon 7 of the gene. Four of these mutations (T238P: ACT-->CCT; L242F:CTC-->TTC; R252G:CGG-->GGG; and 1043 delta 11: nt 1043-nt 1053 deleted) have so far not been described in the literature. Including these new mutations at least 21 different gene lesions and one sequence polymorphism exist for exon 7. Despite this large number unbiased calculation of the mutation frequency/exon size ratio does not provide conclusive evidence that exon 7 is a hot spot for disease causing mutations. Extensive screening during our experiments also failed to demonstrate the existence of excessive polymorphism in this part of the gene. It might therefore be speculated that the functional importance of the highly conserved exon 7 sequence accounts for the clustering of observed mutations which result in clinically manifest PKU. In addition we report our experience in regard to the resolution capacity of denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), a nonradioactive technique for the rapid screening of unknown mutations in exon 7.",3 1
"Exome sequencing identifies potential risk variants for Mendelian disorders at high prevalence in Qatar. || Chromosomes, Human Databases, Genetic Exome Female Gene Frequency Genetic Diseases, Inborn Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genetic Variation Humans Male Prevalence Qatar Sequence Analysis, DNA || Exome sequencing of families of related individuals has been highly successful in identifying genetic polymorphisms responsible for Mendelian disorders. Here, we demonstrate the value of the reverse approach, where we use exome sequencing of a sample of unrelated individuals to analyze allele frequencies of known causal mutations for Mendelian diseases. We sequenced the exomes of 100 individuals representing the three major genetic subgroups of the Qatari population (Q1 Bedouin, Q2 Persian-South Asian, Q3 African) and identified 37 variants in 33 genes with effects on 36 clinically significant Mendelian diseases. These include variants not present in 1000 Genomes and variants at high frequency when compared with 1000 Genomes populations. Several of these Mendelian variants were only segregating in one Qatari subpopulation, where the observed subpopulation specificity trends were confirmed in an independent population of 386 Qataris. Premarital genetic screening in Qatar tests for only four out of the 37, such that this study provides a set of Mendelian disease variants with potential impact on the epidemiological profile of the population that could be incorporated into the testing program if further experimental and clinical characterization confirms high penetrance.",1
"The effect of a single base pair deletion (delta T525) and a C1634T missense mutation (pro545leu) on the expression of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase in patients with glycogen storage disease type II. || Adolescent Adult Base Sequence Cell Line Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17 Female Gene Deletion Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Molecular Sequence Data Point Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII, Pompe's disease) is caused by an autosomal recessive inheritance of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase deficiency. By sequence analysis we have identified the mutations in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) of two unrelated patients, who have one and two copies, respectively, of the same missense mutation. The milder affected adult patient was found to be homozygous for a C1634T transition resulting in the substitution of pro545 by leu. The more severely affected adolescent patient had this same mutant allele combined with a 1 base pair deletion (delta T525) in the second allele causing premature termination at nucleotide positions 658-660. Both these mutations were introduced in wild-type alpha-glucosidase cDNA and expressed in COS-1 cells to analyse their effect. The delta T525 mutation prohibits the formation of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase completely. The pro545-->leu substitution is compatible with normal synthesis but hampers enzyme maturation and results in a 92% net loss of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase activity. The patient with adult GSDII has, in accordance with the allelic constitution, a 2-fold higher residual activity than the patient with juvenile GSDII. The delta T525 deletion was detected in two other unrelated patients, and also the C1634T transition was encountered in two more Caucasian patients with GSDII.",1 0
"Observational clinical study in juvenile-adult glycogenosis type 2 patients undergoing enzyme replacement therapy for up to 4 years. || Adolescent Adult Aged Body Mass Index Child Cohort Studies Echocardiography Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Heart Rate Humans Italy Male Middle Aged Observation Physical Examination Respiration Severity of Illness Index Statistics, Nonparametric Time Factors Treatment Outcome Vital Capacity Walking Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || The objective of this study was to describe a large Italian cohort of patients with late-onset glycogen storage disease type 2 (GSDII) at various stages of disease progression and to evaluate the clinical effectiveness of alglucosidase alpha enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). Previous studies showed in late-onset patients ERT efficacy against placebo and variable response in uncontrolled studies. Seventy-four juvenile or adult GSDII patients were treated with ERT in a multicenter open label, non-randomized study, from 12 months up to 54 months. Recombinant human alpha glucosidase (rh-GAA) was injected by intravenous route at 20 mg/kg every second week. Patients were divided into three groups according to ERT duration: Group A received treatment for 12-23 months (n = 16), Group B for 24-35 months (n = 14), and Group C for more than 36 months (n = 44). Clinical assessment included a 6-min walk test (6MWT), forced vital capacity (FVC), the Walton and Gardner-Medwin score, the number of hours of ventilation, body mass index, echocardiography and blood creatine kinase (CK). Included in our cohort were 33 males and 41 females (M:F = 0.8:1), with a mean age at first symptoms of 28.3 years (range 2-55 years) and a mean age of 43 years at study entry (range 7-72 years). Seven wheelchair bound patients, as well as 27 patients requiring ventilation support, were included. After treatment we could observe an increase in distance walked on the 6MWT in the large majority of patients (48/58; 83%), with an overall mean increase of 63 m (from 320 ± 161 to 383 ± 178 m). After treatment in the majority of patients FVC was improved or unchanged (45/69; 65%). In ventilated patients we observed an improvement in average number of hours off the ventilator (from 15.6 to 12.1 h). Six patients stopped mechanical ventilation and two others started it. The effect of therapy was not related to ERT duration. Nine of 64 patients (13%) that underwent to echocardiography showed a variable degree of cardiac hypertrophy (left ventriculum or septum), and a positive effect was observed after 36 months of ERT in one adult case. Discontinuation of treatment occurred in four patients: one drop-off case, one patient died for a sepsis after 34 months of treatment and two patients stopped ERT for worsening of general clinical condition. Mild adverse effects were observed in four cases (5%). This study represents the largest cohort of late-onset GSDII patients treated with ERT, and confirm a positive effect of treatment. These results, obtained in a large case series on therapy, indicate a favourable effect of ERT therapy, even in more advanced stage of the disease.",3 1
"Genetic testing for sporadic hearing loss using targeted massively parallel sequencing identifies 10 novel mutations. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Connexins DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Association Studies Genetic Heterogeneity Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genotype Hearing Loss High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Middle Aged Mutation Young Adult || The genetic heterogeneity of non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) has hampered the identification of its pathogenic mutations. Several recent studies applied targeted genome enrichment (TGE) and massively parallel sequencing (MPS) to simultaneously screen a large set of known hearing loss (HL) genes. However, most of these studies were focused on familial cases. To evaluate the effectiveness of TGE and MPS on screening sporadic NSHL patients, we recruited 63 unrelated sporadic NSHL probands, who had various levels of HL and were excluded for mutations in GJB2, MT-RNR1, and SLC26A4 genes. TGE and MPS were performed on 131 known HL genes using the Human Deafness Panel oto-DA3 (Otogenetics Corporation., Norcross, GA). We identified 14 pathogenic variants in STRC, CATSPER2, USH2A, TRIOBP, MYO15A, GPR98, and TMPRSS3 genes in eight patients (diagnostic rate = 12.7%). Among these variants, 10 were novel compound heterozygous mutations. The identification of pathogenic mutations could predict the progression of HL, and guide diagnosis and treatment of the disease.",1
"Comprehensive genetic testing in the clinical evaluation of 1119 patients with hearing loss. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool Female Genetic Heterogeneity Genetic Testing Hearing Loss Humans Infant Male || Hearing loss is the most common sensory deficit in humans, affecting 1 in 500 newborns. Due to its genetic heterogeneity, comprehensive diagnostic testing has not previously been completed in a large multiethnic cohort. To determine the aggregate contribution inheritance makes to non-syndromic hearing loss, we performed comprehensive clinical genetic testing with targeted genomic enrichment and massively parallel sequencing on 1119 sequentially accrued patients. No patient was excluded based on phenotype, inheritance or previous testing. Testing resulted in identification of the underlying genetic cause for hearing loss in 440 patients (39%). Pathogenic variants were found in 49 genes and included missense variants (49%), large copy number changes (18%), small insertions and deletions (18%), nonsense variants (8%), splice-site alterations (6%), and promoter variants (<1%). The diagnostic rate varied considerably based on phenotype and was highest for patients with a positive family history of hearing loss or when the loss was congenital and symmetric. The spectrum of implicated genes showed wide ethnic variability. These findings support the more efficient utilization of medical resources through the development of evidence-based algorithms for the diagnosis of hearing loss.",1 4
"Glycogen storage disease type II in Spanish patients: high frequency of c.1076-1G>C mutation. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Child Child, Preschool Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Homozygote Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Lysosomes Middle Aged Mutation Spain alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II is an autosomal recessive disorder of glycogen metabolism due to deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase. We present the molecular and enzymatic analyses of 22 Spanish GSD II patients. Molecular analyses revealed nine novel mutations. The most common defects were mutations c.-32-13T>G (25%) and c.1076-1G>C (14%) and we report the first homozygous patient for c.1076-1G>C mutation presenting with an infantile form. Alleles bearing mutation c.-32-13T>G are associated with the same haplotype.",3 1 4
"Variations in genotype-phenotype correlations in phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Chinese Han population. || Alleles Asian Continental Ancestry Group China Exons Genetic Association Studies Genetic Loci Genomics Genotype Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Prognosis || The value of genotyping to predict variant phenotypes in patients with phenylalanine hydroxylase (Pah) deficiency is a matter of debate. However, there exists no comprehensive population relationship study focused on the Han Chinese. We analyzed genotype-phenotype correlation for 186 different genotypes in 338 unrelated Chinese patients harboring 109 different Pah mutations. Two systems were used in this process. The first was a phenotype prediction system based on arbitrary values (AV) attributed to each mutation. The second was a pair-wise correlation analysis. The observed phenotype for AV analysis was the corresponding metabolic phenotype stratified according to the pretreatment phenylalanine (Phe) value. We found that the observed phenotype matched the predicted phenotype in 54.41% of 272 patients for whom AV information was available; the highest degree of concordance (61.83%) was found in patients with null/null genotypes, whereas the lowest ""concordance rate"" (32.69%) was observed for patients with expected mild-PKU phenotype. There are repeated inconsistencies for such mutations as R241C, R243Q, R261Q, V388M, V399V, R408Q, A434D and EX6-96A>G which are associated with variable phenotypes in patients with identical genotype. Significant correlations were disclosed between pretreatment Phe values and predicted residual activity (r=-0.45643, P<0.0001) or AV sum (r=-0.59523, P<0.0001). Our study supports the notion that the Pah mutation genotype is the main determinant of metabolic phenotype in most patients in a particular population, and provided novel insights into the values that underpin the subsequent treatment and the prognosis of PKU in Chinese.",3 1
"Application of embryonic lethal or other obvious phenotypes to characterize the clinical significance of genetic variants found in trans with known deleterious mutations. || Alleles Breast Neoplasms Genes, BRCA1 Haplotypes Humans Mutation Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide || This work describes an approach to characterize the clinical significance of genetic variants detected during the genetic testing of BRCA1 in patients from hereditary breast/ovarian cancer families. Results from transgenic mice and extensive clinical testing support the hypothesis that biallelic BRCA1 mutations result in embryonic lethality. Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that variants of uncertain clinical significance found to reside in trans with known deleterious mutations impart reduced risk for cancer. This approach was applied to a large data set of 55,630 patients who underwent clinical BRCA1 screening by whole gene direct DNA sequencing. Fourteen common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were used to assign 10 previously defined common, recurrent, or canonical haplotypes in 99% of these cases. From a total of 1,477 genetic variants detected in these patients, excluding haplotype-tagging SNPs, 877 (59%) could be unambiguously assigned to one or more haplotypes. In 41 instances, variants previously classified as being of uncertain clinical significance, mostly missense variants, were excluded as fully penetrant mutations due to their coincidence in trans with known deleterious mutations. From a total of 1,150 patients that harbored these 41 variants, 956 carried one as the sole variant of uncertain clinical significance reported. This approach could have widespread application to other disease genes where compound heterozygous mutations are incompatible with life or result in obvious phenotypes. This largely computational technique is advantageous because it relies upon existing clinical data and is likely to prove informative for prevalent genetic variants in large data sets.",1
"Two missense mutations causing mild hyperphenylalaninemia associated with DNA haplotype 12. ||  || The genetic defects responsible for most phenylketonuria (PKU) and hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) cases are located in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. Approximately 50-60 mutations have been reported in Caucasians and are reflected in a wide range of clinical severities. Most mutations are linked to specific haplotypes, as defined by eight polymorphic restriction sites in the PAH gene. We hypothesized that there is at least one mild mutation linked to haplotype 12 in the Swedish PKU/HPA population, since 7 of 8 patients carrying haplotype 12 had mild HPA. Sequence analysis revealed a C-to-G transversion at the second base of codon 322, resulting in a substitution of glycine for alanine, in four mutant haplotype 12 genes, and a G-to-A transition at the second base of codon 408, resulting in a substitution of glutamine for arginine, in another three mutant haplotype 12 genes. These mutations segregated with mutant haplotype 12 alleles in nuclear families but were not present on normal or other mutant alleles. Both mutations were tested in a eukaryotic expression system in which enzyme activities of different mutant PAH enzymes reflect the relative severities of the mutations, although these in vitro activities cannot be translated directly into in vivo hepatic activities. The A322G mutant PAH had about 75% and the R408Q mutant PAH about 55% of the wild-type PAH enzyme activity. These in vitro activities are the highest reported for mutant PAH enzymes produced in the same expression system.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)",1 0
"Pediatric cardiomyopathy: importance of genetic and metabolic evaluation. || Adolescent Cardiomyopathies Carrier Proteins Child Child, Preschool DNA, Mitochondrial Echocardiography Female Genetic Testing Heart Ventricles Humans Infant Male Mutation Ohio Pedigree Prevalence Retrospective Studies Young Adult || Cardiomyopathy is a heterogeneous disease with a strong genetic component. A research-based pediatric cardiomyopathy registry identified familial, syndromic, or metabolic causes in 30% of children. However, these results predated clinical genetic testing. We determined the prevalence of familial, syndromic, or metabolic causes in 83 consecutive unrelated patients referred for genetic evaluation of cardiomyopathy from 2006 to 2009. Seventy-six percent of probands (n = 63) were categorized as familial, syndromic, or metabolic. Forty-three percent (n = 18) of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) patients had mutations in sarcomeric genes, with MYH7 and MYBPC3 mutations predominating. Syndromic (17%; n = 7) and metabolic (26%; n = 11) causes were frequently identified in HCM patients. The metabolic subgroup was differentiated by decreased endocardial shortening fraction on echocardiography. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) patients had similar rates of syndromic (20%; n = 5) and metabolic (16%; n = 4) causes, but fewer familial cases (24%; n = 6) compared with HCM patients. The cause of cardiomyopathy is identifiable in a majority of affected children. An underlying metabolic or syndromic cause is identified in >35% of children with HCM or DCM. Identification of etiology is important for management, family-based risk assessment, and screening.",1 4
"Comprehensive molecular diagnosis of 67 Chinese Usher syndrome probands: high rate of ethnicity specific mutations in Chinese USH patients. || China Cohort Studies Ethnic Groups Female Humans Male Molecular Diagnostic Techniques Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome (USH) is the most common disease causing combined deafness and blindness. It is predominantly an autosomal recessive genetic disorder with occasionally digenic cases. Molecular diagnosis of USH patients is important for disease management. Few studies have tried to find the genetic cause of USH in Chinese patients. This study was designed to determine the mutation spectrum of Chinese USH patients. We applied next generation sequencing to characterize the mutation spectrum in 67 independent Chinese families with at least one member diagnosed with USH. Blood was collected at Peking Union Medical College Hospital. This cohort is one of the largest USH cohorts reported. We utilized customized panel and whole exome sequencing, variant analysis, Sanger validation and segregation tests to find disease causing mutations in these families. We identified biallelic disease causing mutations in known USH genes in 70 % (49) of our patients. As has been previously reported, MYO7A is the most frequently mutated gene in our USH type I patients while USH2A is the most mutated gene in our USH type II patients. In addition, we identify mutations in CLRN1, DFNB31, GPR98 and PCDH15 for the first time in Chinese USH patients. Together, mutations in CLRN1, DNFB31, GPR98 and PCDH15 account for 11.4 % of disease in our cohort. Interestingly, although the spectrum of disease genes is quite similar between our Chinese patient cohort and other patient cohorts from different (and primarily Caucasian) ethnic backgrounds, the mutations themselves are dramatically different. In particular, 76 % (52/68) of alleles found in this study have never been previously reported. Interestingly, we observed a strong enrichment for severe protein truncating mutations expected to have severe functional consequence on the protein in USH II patients compared to the reported mutation spectrum in RP patients, who often carry partial protein truncating mutations. Our study provides the first comprehensive genetic characterization of a large collection of Chinese USH patients. Up to 90 % of USH patients have disease caused by mutations in known USH disease genes. By combining NGS-based molecular diagnosis and patient clinical information, a more accurate diagnosis, prognosis and personalized treatment of USH patients can be achieved.",1
"Endoplasmic reticulum stress induces autophagy through activation of p38 MAPK in fibroblasts from Pompe disease patients carrying c.546G>T mutation. || 1-Deoxynojirimycin Autophagy Cells, Cultured DNA Mutational Analysis Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Enzyme Activation Enzyme Activators Fibroblasts Glycogen Storage Disease Type II MAP Kinase Signaling System Phosphoproteins Phosphorylation Point Mutation Protein Folding Protein Isoforms Unfolded Protein Response alpha-Glucosidases p38 Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases || Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II) is an autosomal recessive myopathic disorder arising from the deficiency of lysosomal acid α-glucosidase (GAA). Activation of autophagy is a key pathophysiological feature in skeletal muscle fibers and fibroblasts from patients with Pompe disease. The accumulation of autophagic vacuoles has been shown to interfere with the efficacy of enzyme replacement therapy with recombinant human GAA. However, the induction mechanism of autophagy in Pompe disease is still unclear. In this study, we show that misfolded GAA-induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress triggers autophagy in a manner regulated by p38 MAPK signaling pathways in fibroblasts from late-onset patients with Pompe disease. By studying normal fibroblasts and patient fibroblasts carrying a c.546G>T mutation, we uncovered that mutant GAA was rapidly degraded by proteasome. In addition, we found both activation of ER stress response and autophagy in these patient fibroblasts. Treatment with N-butyl-deoxynojirimycin (NB-DNJ), which acts as a pharmacological chaperone for certain mutant forms of GAA, led to attenuation of not only ER stress, but also autophagy in patient fibroblasts. Levels of phosphorylated p38 MAPK observed in patient fibroblasts were decreased after treatment with NB-DNJ. The autophagic response in patient fibroblasts was also negatively regulated by treatment with the p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580. These findings define a critical role for ER stress in the activation of autophagy due to GAA mutation, and provide evidence that chaperone therapy may be a useful treatment for alleviation of autophagy in Pompe disease patients carrying a chaperon-responsive mutation.",3 1
"Detecting multiple lysosomal storage diseases by tandem mass spectrometry--a national newborn screening program in Taiwan. || DNA Dried Blood Spot Testing Fabry Disease Female Gaucher Disease Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant, Newborn Lysosomal Storage Diseases Male Neonatal Screening Pilot Projects Quality Control Reproducibility of Results Sequence Analysis, DNA Taiwan Tandem Mass Spectrometry || Interest in lysosomal storage diseases in newborn screening programs has increased in recent years. Two techniques, fluorescence (4-MU) and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) methods are frequently used. We report a pilot study of large scale newborn screening for Fabry, Pompe, Gaucher, and MPS I diseases by using the MS/MS method in Taiwan and compared the performance of the MS/MS with 4-MU methods. More than 100,000 dried blood spots (DBSs) were collected consecutively as part of the national Taiwan newborn screening programs. The enzyme activities were detected by the MS/MS method from a DBS punch. Mutation analysis was further performed for newborns with detected enzyme deficiency. The DNA sequence analysis for suspected cases revealed 64 newborns with confirmed Fabry mutations, 16 were classified as infantile or late-onset Pompe disease, and 1 was characterized as Gaucher disease. The positive predict value increased from 4.0% to 7.1% in the Pompe study, and from 61.0% to 95.5% in the Fabry study by the MS/MS method compared to 4-MU assay. The MS/MS method has been validated as a more specific, powerful and efficient tool than the 4-MU assay. It also provided a multiplex solution of newborn screening for lysosomal storage diseases.",3 1
"Pompe disease in infants: improving the prognosis by newborn screening and early treatment. || Cardiomyopathies Combined Modality Therapy Disease Progression Follow-Up Studies Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant, Newborn Infusions, Intravenous Neonatal Screening Parenteral Nutrition, Total Physical Therapy Modalities Respiration, Artificial Survival Rate Taiwan alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease causes progressive, debilitating, and often life-threatening musculoskeletal, respiratory, and cardiac symptoms. Favorable outcomes with early intravenous enzyme-replacement therapy and alglucosidase alfa have been reported, but early clinical diagnosis before the development of severe symptoms has rarely been possible in infants. We recently conducted a newborn screening pilot program in Taiwan to improve the early detection of Pompe disease. Six of 206088 newborns screened tested positive and were treated for Pompe disease. Five had the rapidly progressive form of Pompe disease, characterized by cardiac and motor involvement, and were treated soon after diagnosis. The sixth patient was started on treatment at 14 months of age because of progressive muscle weakness. Outcomes were compared with treated patients whose disease was diagnosed clinically and with untreated historical control subjects. At the time of this report, patients had been treated for 14 to 32 months. The 5 infants who had early cardiac involvement demonstrated normalization of cardiac size and muscle pathology with normal physical growth and age-appropriate gains in motor development. The infant without cardiac involvement also achieved normal motor development with treatment. Survival in patients who had newborn screening was significantly improved compared with those in the untreated reference cohort (P = .001). Survival in the treated clinical comparators was reduced but not statistically different from that in the newborn screening group (P = .48). Results from this study indicate that early treatment can benefit infants with Pompe disease and highlight the advantages of early diagnosis, which can be achieved by newborn screening.",3 1
"Phenylketonuria mutations in Northern China. || China Codon, Nonsense DNA Mutational Analysis Frameshift Mutation Gene Frequency Genotype Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Mutation spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene in patients with phenylketonuria (PKU) in Northern China is described with a discussion on genotype-phenotype correlation. By using PCR/SSCP and DNA sequencing, all exons of PAH gene in the 185 unrelated patients with PKU from Northern China were studied. A total of 70 different mutations, including 42 missense, 12 splice, 7 nonsense, 5 deletion, 3 insertion, and 1 silence/splice mutations, were detected in 349/370 mutant alleles (94.3%). Deletion, insertion, and frameshift mutations were found for the first time in China PKU patients. The mutations R243Q, EX6-96A>G, R111X, Y356X, and R413P were the prevalent mutations with relative frequencies of 22.2, 11.1, 8.7, 6.5, and 6.5%, respectively. Fifteen novel mutations were identified in this study: I38fsX19, IVS4+3G>C, Y154H, R157K, R157I, T200fsX6, Q267H, Q267E, F302fsX39, G346R, S349A, L367L, R400K, IVS12+4A>G, and IVS12+6T>A. Each of them occurs at very low frequency (0.3-1.1%). The mutation spectrum of PKU in Chinese is similar to other Asian populations but significantly different from European populations. Altogether, 70 different mutations are found in 109 genotypes distributed among 185 PKU patients. As shown by the analysis, the predicted residual activity found in the majority of PKU individuals match their in vivo phenotypes, though evidence is also found for both phenotypic inconsistencies among subjects with similar genotypes and discordance between the in vitro and in vivo effects of some mutant alleles. The study enables us to construct a national database in China serving as a valuable tool for genetic counseling and prognostic evaluation of future cases of PKU.",3 1
"Identification of four novel mutations in the alpha glucosidase gene in five Italian patients with infantile onset glycogen storage disease type II. || Age of Onset Animals Blotting, Western CHO Cells Child, Preschool Cricetinae Diseases in Twins Exons Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Italy Male Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation Sequence Deletion Transfection alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII) is an autosomal recessive disorder due to the deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme acid alpha glucosidase. Four novel mutations (C670T, G989A, G2188T, and Delta 23 nt 828-850) were identified in five Italian patients with the infantile form of the disease. The C670T mutation was present in two unrelated patients in heterozygosity; the effect on enzyme activity was assessed by in vitro expression. COS-1 cells expressing the C670T allele had a twofold higher activity than the negative control cells. The G989A and G2188T point mutations lead to the introduction of premature stop signals that results in truncated forms of alpha glucosidase. The in vitro expression of G2188T allele demonstrated no increment in activity compared to negative control. The frame shifting deletion of nucleotides 828-850 was identified in one patient in heterozygosity. The shift in the reading frame introduces a stop codon 135 nucleotides downstream the deletion junction that results in a truncated protein without catalytic activity. Nested PCR screening showed that the mutation was carried by the mother and was absent in the other members of the family. The four novel severe mutations herein described concerned only infantile onset GSDII patients; the loss of enzyme activity is correlated with the severity of the disease.",1
"Molecular genetic study of Pompe disease in Chinese patients in Taiwan. ||  || Pompe disease is caused by mutations in the acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) gene. Multiple kinds of mutations in the GAA gene have been reported worldwide. In order to elucidate the molecular basis of the disease in Taiwanese patients of Chinese origin, we have recruited 11 unrelated families who had at least one member with Pompe disease for study. We used 16 pairs of oligonucleotide primers to amplify all the coding regions from exon 2 to 20 in the family members. The coding regions were sequenced on both the sense and antisense strands. We identified 7 different mutations in 17 alleles but failed to identify the defects in the other 5 alleles. The most common defect was D645E (Asp645Glu), accounting for 36% (8/22 alleles) of mutations, followed by G615R (Gly615Arg) (3 alleles); 1411del4 (Glu471-shift) (2 alleles); and one allele each of R600H (Arg600His); deltaN675 (deltaAsn675); 2380delC (Arg794-shift) and 2815delGT (Val939-shift). The molecular defects of Pompe disease are highly heterogeneous in Chinese. Characterization of the molecular defects of the disease is useful for a genotype-phenotype correlation and for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis.",1
"SLC26A4/PDS genotype-phenotype correlation in hearing loss with enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct (EVA): evidence that Pendred syndrome and non-syndromic EVA are distinct clinical and genetic entities. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Female Genotype Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Membrane Transport Proteins Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Vestibular Aqueduct || ",1
"Skeletal muscle pathology of infantile Pompe disease during long-term enzyme replacement therapy. || Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Muscle, Skeletal alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive metabolic neuromuscular disorder caused by a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA). It has long been believed that the underlying pathology leading to tissue damage is caused by the enlargement and rupture of glycogen-filled lysosomes. Recent studies have also implicated autophagy, an intracellular lysosome-dependent degradation system, in the disease pathogenesis. In this study, we characterize the long-term impact of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with recombinant human GAA (rhGAA) on lysosomal glycogen accumulation and autophagy in some of the oldest survivors with classic infantile Pompe disease (IPD). Muscle biopsies from 8 [4 female, 4 male; 6 cross-reactive immunologic material (CRIM)-positive, 2 CRIM-negative] patients with a confirmed diagnosis of classic IPD were examined using standard histopathological approaches. In addition, muscle biopsies were evaluated by immunostaining for lysosomal marker (lysosomal-associated membrane protein-2; LAMP2), autophagosomal marker (microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3; LC3), and acid and alkaline ATPases. All patients received rhGAA by infusion at cumulative biweekly doses of 20-40 mg/kg. Median age at diagnosis of classic IPD was 3.4 months (range: 0 to 6.5 months; n = 8). At the time of muscle biopsy, the patients' ages ranged from 1 to 103 months and ERT duration ranged from 0 (i.e., baseline, pre-ERT) to 96 months. The response to therapy varied considerably among the patients: some patients demonstrated motor gains while others experienced deterioration of motor function, either with or without a period of initial clinical benefit. Skeletal muscle pathology included fiber destruction, lysosomal vacuolation, and autophagic abnormalities (i.e., buildup), particularly in fibers with minimal lysosomal enlargement. Overall, the pathology reflected clinical status. This is the first study to investigate the impact of rhGAA ERT on lysosomal glycogen accumulation and autophagic buildup in patients with classic IPD beyond 18 months of treatment. Our findings indicate that ERT does not fully halt or reverse the underlying skeletal muscle pathology in IPD. The best outcomes were observed in the two patients who began therapy early, namely at 0.5 and 1.1 months of age.",1
"Eight new mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in Italian patients with hyperphenylalaninemia. ||  || This report identifies eight new mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene detected in Italian patients with hyperphenylalaninemia. The trivial name of the mutations, predicted phenotypic effect, and population of origin (Italian region) are as follows: F55L (nonconservative change: classic, moderate, mild PKU ?; Sicily), IVS2nt-13 (splicing defect, classic PKU; Tuscany), I65N (nonconservative change classic, moderate, mild PKU ?; Sicily), H201Y (non-PKU HPA; Sicily), I269L (non-PKU HPA, or polymorphism; Sicily), IVS7nt3 (splicing defect or polymorphism; Sicily), I283N (classic PKU; Sicily), IVS12nt2 (splicing defect, classic PKU; Sicily and Apulia). In Sicily, the relative frequency of mutations F55L, I65N, H201Y, I269L, IVS7nt3, I283N, IVS12nt2 is < 1%. The seven new mutations identified in the Sicilian population increase the remarkable genetic heterogeneity typical of this population with an estimated homozygosity value at the PAH locus of 0.041.",3 1
"Illegitimate transcription of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in lymphocytes for identification of mutations in phenylketonuria. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Codon DNA Exons Glutamates Glutamic Acid Glycine Humans Infant Leucine Liver Lymphocytes Male Molecular Sequence Data Oligodeoxyribonucleotides Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Point Mutation Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Transcription, Genetic || Taking advantage of the 'illegitimate' transcription of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene, we have been able to analyse the PAH cDNA sequence of hyperphenylalaninemic children in circulating lymphocytes. Using this approach, we have also identified 3 novel mutations in cDNA from liver and lymphocytes of two patients. One mutation, detected by the abnormal pattern of migration of an amplified fragment, is a C to T transition in the splice acceptor site of intron 10, which resulted in the skipping of exon 11 with the premature termination of RNA translation downstream from exon 12 (-3 IVS10). The other two mutations are missense mutations in exons 10 and 11 (respectively, L333F and E390G). The present study supports the view that circulating lymphocytes give easy access to PAH gene transcripts whose nucleotide sequence is identical to that reported in liver and therefore represent a useful tool for molecular genetic studies in phenylketonuria.",3 1 0
"Fibromyalgia-like symptoms associated with irritable bowel syndrome: A challenging diagnosis of late-onset Pompe disease. || Adult Diagnosis, Differential Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Fibromyalgia Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Irritable Bowel Syndrome Pregnancy Pregnancy Complications || Late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder which usually presents as a limb-girdle myopathy with early respiratory involvement. We report 2 sisters with an uncommon presentation of LOPD characterized by fibromyalgia-like pain associated with irritable bowel syndrome. In both sisters, clinical examination was normal and had remained stable for 10 years. The serum creatine kinase level was mildly elevated. Several muscle biopsies showed slight nonspecific myopathic abnormalities. A dried blood spot test indicated acid maltase deficiency. The diagnosis of LOPD was confirmed genetically. Both sisters subsequently developed proximal muscle weakness after pregnancy and started enzyme replacement therapy. Under treatment, gastrointestinal symptoms improved, but pain persisted. Clinicians should be aware of this atypical presentation of LOPD to enable earlier diagnosis and treatment.",3 1 4
Pearls & Oy-sters: clues to the diagnosis of adult-onset acid maltase deficiency. || Adult Aged Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Middle Aged || ,1
"Molecular and in silico analyses of the full-length isoform of usherin identify new pathogenic alleles in Usher type II patients. ||  || The usherin gene (USH2A) has been screened for mutations causing Usher syndrome type II (USH2). Two protein isoforms have been identified: a short isoform of 1,546 amino acids and a more recently recognized isoform extending to 5,202 amino acids. We have screened the full length by genomic sequencing. We confirm that many mutations occur in the exons contributing solely to the longer form. USH2 is an autosomal recessive disorder and, in contrast to previous studies, both mutations were identified in 23 patients and a single mutation in 2 out of 33 patients. A total of 34 distinct mutated alleles were identified, including one complex allele with three variants and another with two. A total of 27 of these are novel, confirming that most mutations in usherin are private. Many of the mutations will lead to prematurely truncated protein but as there are a substantial number of missense variants, we have used in silico analysis to assess their pathogenicity. Evidence that they are disease-causing has been produced by protein alignments and three-dimensional (3D) structural predictions when possible. We have identified a previously unrecognized cysteine rich structural domain, containing 12 dicysteine repeats, and show that three missense mutations result in the loss of one of a pair of the defining cysteine-cysteine pairs.",2 1 3
"Utility of phenylalanine hydroxylase genotype for tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness classification in patients with phenylketonuria. || Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Genotype Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Prognosis Treatment Outcome || A need exists to expand the characterization of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) responsiveness in patients with phenylketonuria (PKU), beyond simply evaluating change in blood phenylalanine concentrations. The clinical interpretation of BH(4) responsiveness should be evaluated within the context of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotype. This investigation seeks to use a modified version of a previously developed PAH genotype severity tool, the assigned value (AV) sum, to assess the molecular basis of responsiveness in a clinical cohort and to explore the tool's ability to differentiate BH(4) responsive groups. BH(4) response was previously clinically classified in 58 patients with PKU, with three response groups emerging: definitive responders, provisional responders, and non-responders. Provisional responders represented a clinically ambiguous group, with an initial decrease in plasma phenylalanine concentrations, but limited ability to improve dietary phenylalanine tolerance. In this retrospective analysis, mutations in the PAH gene were identified in each patient. PAH genotype was characterized through the AV sum approach, in which each mutation is given an AV of 1, 2, 4, or 8; the sum of both mutations' AV corresponds to genotype severity, with a lower number representing a more severe phenotype. An AV sum cutoff of 2 (indicative of the most severe genotypes) was used to dichotomize patients and predict BH(4) responsiveness. Provisional responders were classified with the definitive responders then the non-responders to see with which group they best aligned. In 17/19 definitive responders, at least one mutation was mild or moderate in severity (AV sum>2). In contrast, 7/9 provisional responders carried two severe or null mutations (AV sum=2), suggesting little molecular basis for responsiveness. Non-responders represent a heterogeneous group with 15/25 patients carrying two severe mutations (AV sum=2), 5/25 patients carrying one moderate or mild mutation in combination with a severe or null mutation (AV sum>2), and the remaining five patients carrying an uncharacterized mutation in combination with a severe mutation. Predictive sensitivity of the AV sum was maximized (89.5% vs. 67.9%) with limited detriment to specificity (79.4% vs. 80.0%), by classifying provisional responders with the non-responders rather than with the definitive responders. In our clinical cohort, the AV sum tool was able to identify definitive responders with a high degree of sensitivity. As demonstrated by both the provisional responder group and the substantial number of non-responders with AV sums>2, a potential exists for misclassification when BH(4) response is determined by relying solely on change in plasma phenylalanine concentrations. PAH genotype should be incorporated in the clinical evaluation of BH(4) responsiveness.",1
"Targeted exome sequencing identified novel USH2A mutations in Usher syndrome families. || Adult Aged DNA Mutational Analysis Exome Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Humans Male Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Reproducibility of Results Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome (USH) is a leading cause of deaf-blindness in autosomal recessive trait. Phenotypic and genetic heterogeneities in USH make molecular diagnosis much difficult. This is a pilot study aiming to develop an approach based on next-generation sequencing to determine the genetic defects in patients with USH or allied diseases precisely and effectively. Eight affected patients and twelve unaffected relatives from five unrelated Chinese USH families, including 2 pseudo-dominant ones, were recruited. A total of 144 known genes of inherited retinal diseases were selected for deep exome resequencing. Through systematic data analysis using established bioinformatics pipeline and segregation analysis, a number of genetic variants were released. Eleven mutations, eight of them were novel, in the USH2A gene were identified. Biparental mutations in USH2A were revealed in 2 families with pseudo-dominant inheritance. A proband was found to have triple mutations, two of them were supposed to locate in the same chromosome. In conclusion, this study revealed the genetic defects in the USH2A gene and demonstrated the robustness of targeted exome sequencing to precisely and rapidly determine genetic defects. The methodology provides a reliable strategy for routine gene diagnosis of USH.",1
"A molecular analysis of the GAA gene and clinical spectrum in 38 patients with Pompe disease in Japan. ||  || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by acid α-glucosidase (GAA) deficiency, which results in the accumulation of glycogen in lysosomes in multiple tissues, including cardiac, skeletal, and smooth muscle cells. Thus far, 558 sequence variants of the GAA gene have been published in the Pompe Disease Mutation Database, and some mutations appear with considerable frequency in particular ethnic groups, such as Caucasians, Taiwanese, Chinese, and Koreans. However, the GAA mutation pattern in Japanese patients remains poorly understood. We analyzed the relationship between the genetic and clinical features of 38 mostly Japanese patients with Pompe disease from 35 unrelated families. We identified 28 different GAA gene mutations, including 7 novel mutations, by a GAA gene analysis. c.546G > T (22.9%) and c.1857C > G (14.3%) were the most common mutations and accounted for 37.1% of the total mutant alleles. In the six patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD), c.1857C > G was also the most common mutation. In addition, there were 13 homozygotes (5 with the c.546G > T) among the 35 families, which is the highest frequency reported thus far. Regarding the initial symptoms, cardiomegaly was the most common (3/6 = 50%) in IOPD patients, while muscle weakness was observed the most frequently in patients with late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) (15/30 = 50%). Notably, all IOPD patients who showed respiratory distress at the time of onset require respiratory assistance at present (4/4 = 100%). Regarding the presenting symptoms, cardiomegaly (6/6 = 100%) and hepatomegaly (4/6 = 66.7%) were more commonly seen in IOPD, and muscle weakness (24/29 = 82.7%) was observed more frequently in LOPD. Respiratory assistance is required at present in 33.3% of IOPD patients and 50% of LOPD patients, and 20% of IOPD patients and 29.6% of LOPD patients are wheelchair users. These individual clinical courses may be influenced by the timing of the diagnosis and treatment; for example, in 2007, an ERT orphan drug for treatment of Pompe disease, Alglucosidase alfa, was made available in Japan, and there were 5 (5/6 = 83.3%) wheelchair users diagnosed from 2008 to 2009 (cases 32-38) and 4 (4/27 = 14.8%) from 2010 to 2015 (cases 1-31). These findings underscore the importance of the early diagnosis and treatment.",3 1 4
"Low anal sphincter tone in infantile-onset Pompe Disease: an emerging clinical issue in enzyme replacement therapy patients requiring special attention. || Anal Canal Child, Preschool Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Muscle Hypotonia || Pompe Disease (PD) is a lysosomal storage disease caused by acid α-glucosidase deficiency. The infantile form typically results in death in the first year of life. Patient survival has improved with enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), but new complications are being recognized. We report three cases of infantile onset PD on ERT who present with a new finding of poor anal tone, a finding that requires special attention for further complications such as rectal prolapse.",1
"Identification of a small deletion in one allele of patients with infantile form of glycogen storage disease type II. || Alleles Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence China Cloning, Molecular DNA Primers Exons Female Frameshift Mutation Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Molecular Sequence Data Peptide Chain Termination, Translational Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Sequence Deletion alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSD II, Pompe's disease) is an autosomal recessive inherited disease caused by the deficiency of acid alpha-D-glucosidase. In this paper we report two unrelated Chinese patients with infantile form of GSD II who had compound heterozygotes containing a small deletion in one of the acid alpha-D-glucosidase alleles. In both of these compound heterozygotes, one allele contains the C1935A transversion which is the most common mutation in Chinese patients and the other allele contains the newly identified 4 nt deletion of coding sequence (deletion nt 1411-1414). This small deletion causes a reading frameshift and translational premature termination signal in exon 9.",1
"Cessation and resuming of alglucosidase alfa in Pompe disease: a retrospective analysis. || Adult Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Middle Aged Muscle Strength Respiration Retrospective Studies Switzerland Time Factors Treatment Outcome Vital Capacity Walking alpha-Glucosidases || Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with recombinant human alglucosidase alfa (rhGAA) in late-onset Pompe disease is moderately effective. Little is known about the clinical course after treatment termination and the resumption of ERT. In Switzerland, rhGAA therapy for Pompe disease was temporarily withdrawn after the federal court judged that the treatment costs were greatly out of proportion compared to the benefits. Re-treatment was initiated after the therapy was finally licensed. We retrospectively analysed seven Pompe patients, who underwent cessation and resumption of ERT (median age 43 years). The delay from first symptoms to final diagnosis ranged from 4 to 20 years. The demographics, clinical characteristics, assessments with the 6-min walking test (6-MWT), the predicted forced vital capacity (FVC) and muscle strength were analysed. Before initiation of ERT, all patients suffered from proximal muscle weakness of the lower limbs; one was wheelchair-bound and two patients received night-time non-invasive ventilation. Initial treatment stabilised respiratory function in most patients and improved their walking performance. After treatment cessation, upright FVC declined in most and the 6-MWT declined in all patients. Two patients needed additional non-invasive ventilatory support. Twelve months after resuming ERT, the respiratory and walking capacity improved again in most patients. However, aside for one patient, none of the patients reached the same level of respiratory function or distance walked in 6 min, as at the time of ERT withdrawal. We conclude that cessation of ERT in Pompe disease causes a decline in clinical function and should be avoided. Resuming treatment only partially recovers respiratory function and walking capacity.",3 1
"Molecular genetics of tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. ||  || Mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene result in phenylketonuria (PKU). Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4))-responsive hyperphenylalaninemia has been recently described as a variant of PAH deficiency caused by specific mutations in the PAH gene. It has been suggested that BH(4)-responsiveness may be predicted from the corresponding genotypes. Data from BH(4) loading tests indicated an incidence of BH(4)-responsiveness of >40% in the general PKU population and >80% in mild PKU patients. The current project entailed genotype analysis of 315 BH(4)-responsive patients tabulated in the BIOPKUdb database and comparison with the data from the PAHdb locus-specific knowledgebase, as well as with previously published PAH mutations for several European countries, Northern China, and South Korea. We identified 57 mutations, presenting with a substantial residual PAH activity (average approximately 47%), presumed to be associated with BH(4)-responsiveness. More than 89% of patients are found to be compound heterozygotes. The three most common mutations found in >5% of BH(4)-responsive patients are p.A403 V, p.R261Q, and p.Y414C. Using the Hardy-Weinberg formula the predicted average frequency of BH(4)-responsiveness in European populations was calculated to be 55% (range 17-79%, lowest in Baltic countries and Poland and highest in Spain), 57% in Northern China, and 55% for South Korea. The genotype-predicted prevalence of BH(4)-responsiveness was higher than prevalence data obtained from BH(4) loading tests. Inconsistent results were observed for mutations p.L48S, p.I65 T, p.R158Q, p.R261Q, and p.Y414C. Our data suggest that BH(4)-responsiveness may be more common than assumed and to some extent may be predicted or excluded from the patient's genotype.",3 1 0
"A sensitive and specific diagnostic test for hearing loss using a microdroplet PCR-based approach and next generation sequencing. ||  || Implementing DNA diagnostics in clinical practice for extremely heterogeneous diseases such as hearing loss is challenging, especially when attempting to reach high sensitivity and specificity in a cost-effective fashion. Next generation sequencing has enabled the development of such a test, but the most commonly used genomic target enrichment methods such as hybridization-based capture suffer from restrictions. In this study, we have adopted a new flexible approach using microdroplet PCR-based technology for target enrichment, in combination with massive parallel sequencing to develop a DNA diagnostic test for autosomal recessive hereditary hearing loss. This approach enabled us to identify the genetic basis of hearing loss in 9 of 24 patients, a success rate of 37.5%. Our method also proved to have high sensitivity and specificity. Currently, routine molecular genetic diagnostic testing for deafness is in most cases only performed for the GJB2 gene and a positive result is typically only obtained in 10-20% of deaf children. Individuals with mutations in GJB2 had already been excluded in our selected set of 24 patients. Therefore, we anticipate that our deafness test may lead to a genetic diagnosis in roughly 50% of unscreened autosomal recessive deafness cases. We propose that this diagnostic testing approach represents a significant improvement in clinical practice as a standard diagnostic tool for children with hearing loss.",1
"Genetic basis of hearing loss associated with enlarged vestibular aqueducts in Koreans. || Adolescent Adult Biological Transport Case-Control Studies Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Hearing Loss Humans Korea Male Membrane Transport Proteins Polymorphism, Genetic Sulfate Transporters Sulfates Vestibular Aqueduct || Sensorineural hearing loss associated with enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct (EVA) can be associated with mutations of the SLC26A4 gene. In western populations, less than one-half of the affected individuals with EVA have two mutant SLC26A4 alleles, and EVA is frequently caused by unknown genetic or environmental factors alone or in combination with a single SLC26A4 mutation as part of a complex trait. In this study, we ascertained 26 Korean probands with EVA and performed nucleotide sequence analysis to detect SLC26A4 mutations. All subjects had bilateral EVA, and 20 of 26 were sporadic (simplex) cases. Fourteen different mutations were identified, including nine novel mutations. Five mutations were recurrent and accounted for 80% of all mutant alleles, providing a basis for the design and interpretation of cost-efficient mutation detection algorithms. Two mutant alleles were identified in 21 (81%), one mutant allele was detected in three (11%), and zero mutant allele was detected in two (8%) of 26 probands. The high proportion of Korean probands with two SLC26A4 mutations may reflect a reduced frequency of other genetic or environmental factors causing EVA in comparison to western populations.",3 1
"In vivo studies of phenylalanine hydroxylase by phenylalanine breath test: diagnosis of tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. || Adolescent Adult Biopterin Breath Tests Carbon Dioxide Carbon Isotopes Child Child, Preschool Female Genotype Humans Infant Male Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)-responsive phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency is characterized by reduction of blood phenylalanine level after a BH4-loading test. Most cases of BH4-responsive PAH deficiency include mild phenylketonuria (PKU) or mild hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA), but not all patients with mild PKU respond to BH4. We performed the phenylalanine breath test as reliable method to determine the BH4 responsiveness. Phenylalanine breath test quantitatively measures the conversion of L-[1-13C] phenylalanine to 13CO2 and is a noninvasive and rapid test. Twenty Japanese patients with HPA were examined with a dose of 10 mg/kg of 13C-phenylalanine with or without a dose of 10 mg . kg(-1) . d(-1) of BH4 for 3 d. The phenylalanine breath test [cumulative recovery rate (CRR)] could distinguish control subjects (15.4 +/- 1.5%); heterozygotes (10.3 +/- 1.0%); and mild HPA (2.74%), mild PKU (1.13 +/- 0.14%), and classical PKU patients (0.29 +/- 0.14%). The genotypes in mild PKU cases were compound heterozygotes with mild (L52S, R241C, R408Q) and severe mutations, whereas a mild HPA case was homozygote of R241C. CRR correlated inversely with pretreatment phenylalanine levels, indicating the gene dosage effects on PKU. BH4 loading increased CRR from 1.13 +/- 0.14 to 2.95 +/- 1.14% (2.6-fold) in mild PKU and from 2.74 to 7.22% (2.6-fold) in mild HPA. A CRR of 5 to 6% reflected maintenance of appropriate serum phenylalanine level. The phenylalanine breath test is useful for the diagnosis of BH4-responsive PAH deficiency and determination of the optimal dosage of BH4 without increasing blood phenylalanine level.",1 0
"Next-generation sequencing reveals the mutational landscape of clinically diagnosed Usher syndrome: copy number variations, phenocopies, a predominant target for translational read-through, and PEX26 mutated in Heimler syndrome. ||  || Combined retinal degeneration and sensorineural hearing impairment is mostly due to autosomal recessive Usher syndrome (USH1: congenital deafness, early retinitis pigmentosa (RP); USH2: progressive hearing impairment, RP). Sanger sequencing and NGS of 112 genes (Usher syndrome, nonsyndromic deafness, overlapping conditions), MLPA, and array-CGH were conducted in 138 patients clinically diagnosed with Usher syndrome. A molecular diagnosis was achieved in 97% of both USH1 and USH2 patients, with biallelic mutations in 97% (USH1) and 90% (USH2), respectively. Quantitative readout reliably detected CNVs (confirmed by MLPA or array-CGH), qualifying targeted NGS as one tool for detecting point mutations and CNVs. CNVs accounted for 10% of identified USH2A alleles, oftenin trans to seemingly monoallelic point mutations. We demonstrate PTC124-induced read-through of the common p.Trp3955* nonsense mutation (13% of detectedUSH2A alleles), a potential therapy target. Usher gene mutations were found in most patients with atypical Usher syndrome, but the diagnosis was adjusted in case of double homozygosity for mutations inOTOA andNR2E3, genes implicated in isolated deafness and RP. Two patients with additional enamel dysplasia had biallelicPEX26 mutations, for the first time linking this gene to Heimler syndrome. Targeted NGS not restricted to Usher genes proved beneficial in uncovering conditions mimicking Usher syndrome.",1
"Incidence of BH4-responsiveness in phenylalanine-hydroxylase-deficient Italian patients. || Biopterin Child, Preschool Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Genotype Humans Infant Italy Mutation Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) is an inherited metabolic disorder due to deficiency of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) or its cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4). BH4-responsiveness in PAH-deficient HPA is a recently described characteristic of most milder phenotypes. BH4-responsive patients show reduction of plasma phenylalanine (phe) levels after oral administration of BH4. Determination of the incidence of BH4-responsiveness among a non-selected, cohort population of PAH-deficient hyperphenylalaninemic patients and evaluation of phenotype-genotype correlations. All patients born in Lombardy (Italy) between January 2000 and December 2004, and affected by HPA (107 patients) were classified after BH4 loading test, analysis of urinary pterins, and determination of DHPR activity in blood, and investigated for BH4-responsiveness. 6R-BH4 (20 mg/kg) was administered orally as a single dose and plasma samples were obtained at time-points 0, 4, 8, and 24 h after BH4 administration. In patients with basal plasma phe levels <or=360 mmol/L a combined phe (100 mg phe/kg) and BH4 (20 mg/kg) loading test was performed. Patients were defined ""responsive to BH4"" when plasma phe levels decreased by 30% 8h after oral BH4 administration. BH4 significantly lowered blood phe levels in 91 (85%) of 107 patients affected by PAH-deficient HPA. Most responsive patients were affected by mild HPA (77%), a smaller percentage by mild (7%) and moderate (7%) phenylketonuria (PKU). One patient with classical PKU was responsive to BH4. Eighteen mutations were found to be associated to the BH4-responsive phenotype. BH4-responsiveness is shown by a consistent number of PAH-deficient hyperphenylalaninemic patients and seems to be common in milder phenotypes. Genotype is not the only factor determining BH4-responsiveness.",3 1
"The molecular basis of phenylketonuria in Koreans. || DNA Mutational Analysis Gene Frequency Genotype Humans Korea Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Time Factors || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an inborn error of metabolism that results from a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). We characterized the PAH mutations of 79 independent Korean patients with PKU or hyperphenylalaninemia. PAH nucleotide sequence analysis revealed 39 different mutations, including ten novel mutations. The novel mutations consisted of nine missense mutations (P69S, G103S, N207D, T278S, P281A, L293M, G332V, S391I, and A447P) and a novel splice site variant (IVS10-3C>G). R243Q, IVS4-1G>A, and E6-96A>G were the most prevalent mutations, as they accounted for 32% of the total mutant alleles in this study. Although some common characteristics of allele frequency and distribution were identified among oriental populations, several distinctive characteristics were revealed in Korean patients. Although the R413P allele is the most prevalent form (30.5%) in Japanese, we detected it in only five chromosomes from 158 independent chromosomes (3.2%). The A259T allele, which has not yet been found in oriental populations, was frequently found in this study. We also observed that tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) responsiveness was associated with specific genotypes (R53H, R241C, and R408Q), suggesting there are some correlations between phenotype and genotype.",3 1
"High antibody titer in an adult with Pompe disease affects treatment with alglucosidase alfa. || Adult Antibodies Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Fibroblasts Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunologic Tests Male Middle Aged Muscle Strength Respiratory Function Tests Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || Clinical trials have demonstrated beneficial effects of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with alglucosidase alfa in infants, children and adults with Pompe disease. Recent studies have shown that high antibody titers can occur in patients receiving ERT and counteract the effect of treatment. This particularly occurs in those patients with classic-infantile Pompe disease that do not produce any endogenous acid α-glucosidase (CRIM-negative). It is still unclear to what extent antibody formation affects the outcome of ERT in adults with residual enzyme activity. We present the case of a patient with adult-onset Pompe disease. He was diagnosed at the age of 39years by enzymatic testing (10.7% residual activity in fibroblasts) and DNA analysis (genotype: c.-32-13T>G/p.Trp516X). Infusion-associated reactions occurred during ERT and the patient's disease progressed. Concurrently, the antibody titer rose to a similarly high level as reported for some CRIM-negative patients with classic-infantile Pompe disease. Using newly developed immunologic-assays we could calculate that approximately 40% of the administered alglucosidase alfa was captured by circulating antibodies. Further, we could demonstrate that uptake of alglucosidase alfa by cultured fibroblasts was inhibited by admixture of the patient's serum. This case demonstrates that also patients with an appreciable amount of properly folded and catalytically active endogenous acid α-glucosidase can develop antibodies against alglucosidase alfa that affect the response to ERT.",3 1
"L-alanine supplementation in late infantile glycogen storage disease type II. || Administration, Oral Alanine Cardiomyopathies Dietary Supplements Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Muscle Hypotonia Myotonic Disorders Treatment Outcome || We report a male with late infantile glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe's disease) who presented at 12 months of age with muscular hypotonia and developmental delay. Oral supplementation with L-alanine has been administered for 5 years. Progression of skeletal myopathy was slow, and cardiomyopathy resolved almost completely. L-alanine may be a valuable supplement for infants with glycogen storage disease type II.",3 1 0
"Later-onset Pompe disease: early detection and early treatment initiation enabled by newborn screening. || Adolescent Adult Biopsy Cardiomyopathies Creatine Kinase Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Fibroblasts Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant, Newborn Lipids Male Middle Aged Mutation Neonatal Screening Skin alpha-Glucosidases || To determine whether newborn screening facilitates early detection and thereby early treatment initiation for later-onset Pompe disease. We have conducted a newborn screening program since 2005. Newborns with deficient skin fibroblast acid α-glucosidase activity and two acid α-glucosidase gene mutations but no cardiomyopathy were defined as having later-onset Pompe disease, and their motor development and serum creatine kinase levels were monitored every 3 to 6 months. Among 344 056 newborns, 13 (1 in 26 466) were found to have later-onset Pompe disease. During a follow-up period of up to 4 years, four patients were treated because of hypotonia, muscle weakness, delayed developmental milestones/motor skills, or elevated creatine kinase levels starting at the ages of 1.5, 14, 34, and 36 months, respectively. Muscle biopsy specimens obtained from the treated patients revealed increased storage of glycogen and lipids. Newborn screening was found to facilitate the early detection of later-onset Pompe disease. A subsequent symptomatic approach then identifies patients who need early treatment initiation.",3 1 4
"Cardiac evaluation in children and adults with Pompe disease sharing the common c.-32-13T>G genotype rarely reveals abnormalities. || Adult Age Factors Aged Child Electrocardiography Family Health Female Genotype Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Heart Diseases Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Retrospective Studies Ultrasonography || Pompe disease is an inherited metabolic disorder caused by deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase. All affected neonates have a severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, leading to cardiac failure and death within the first year of life. We investigated the presence and extent of cardiac involvement in children and adults with Pompe disease with the common c.-32-13T>G genotype to determine the usefulness of cardiac screening in these patients with relatively 'milder' phenotypes. Cardiac dimensions and function were evaluated through echocardiography, electrocardiography and Holter monitoring. The total group comprised 68 patients with Pompe disease, of whom 22 patients had disease onset before the age of 18. Two patients (3%) had cardiac abnormalities possibly related to Pompe disease: Electrocardiography showed a Wolff-Parkinson-White pattern in an 8-year-old girl, and one severely affected adult patient had a mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This hypertrophy did not change during treatment with recombinant human alpha-glucosidase. In addition, four adult patients showed minor cardiac abnormalities which did not exceed the prevalence in the general population and were attributed to advanced age, hypertension or pre-existing cardiac pathology unrelated to Pompe disease. Cardiac involvement is rare in Pompe patients with the common c.-32-13T>G genotype. The younger patients were not more frequently affected than the adults. Electrocardiographic evaluation appears to be appropriate as initial screening tool. Extensive cardiac screening seems indicated only if the electrocardiogram is abnormal or the patient has a history of cardiac disease.",1
"Prevalent connexin 26 gene (GJB2) mutations in Japanese. || Amino Acid Substitution Connexin 26 Connexins Female Frameshift Mutation Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Japan Male Mutation Mutation, Missense Pedigree Point Mutation Polymorphism, Genetic Prevalence Sequence Deletion || The gene responsible for DNFB1 and DFNA3, connexin 26 (GJB2), was recently identified and more than 20 disease causing mutations have been reported so far. This paper presents mutation analysis for GJB2 in Japanese non-syndromic hearing loss patients compatible with recessive inheritance. It was confirmed that GJB2 mutations are an important cause of hearing loss in this population, with three mutations, 235delC, Y136X, and R143W, especially frequent. Of these three mutations, 235delC was most prevalent at 73%. Surprisingly, the 35delG mutation, which is the most common GJB2 mutation in white subjects, was not found in the present study. Our data indicated that specific combinations of GJB2 mutation exist in different populations.",1
"Screening for later-onset Pompe's disease in patients with paucisymptomatic hyperCKemia. || Adult Aged Asymptomatic Diseases Case-Control Studies Creatine Kinase Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Mass Screening Middle Aged Prevalence Young Adult || Pompe's disease is an inherited metabolic myopathy caused by acid α-glucosidase deficiency. Early diagnosis optimizes the treatment effectiveness. One-hundred-thirty-seven consecutive patients with unexplained hyperCKemia underwent the assessment of acid α-glucosidase activity on dried blood spot. Second tier confirmatory testing in positive patients included the assessment of α-glucosidase activity on lymphocytes or muscle tissue and molecular analysis. Three patients were diagnosed with later-onset Pompe's disease, revealing 2.2% prevalence in asymptomatic hyperCKemia. Moreover, three patients positive to the screening revealed abnormal biochemical second tier testing, but were heterozygous for the common c.-32-13T>G mutation at molecular level. The selective screening for later-onset Pompe's disease in asymptomatic hyperCKemia allowed the identification of affected patients in a pre-clinical stage. Additionally, the identification of carriers with biochemical alterations related to Pompe's disease extends the spectrum of its manifestations to heterozygous subjects.",1
"Functional consequences of novel connexin 26 mutations associated with hereditary hearing loss. || Connexin 26 Connexins Gap Junctions HeLa Cells Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Immunohistochemistry Mutation || In a study of 530 individuals with non-syndromic, sensorineural hearing loss, we identified 18 mutations at connexin 26 (Cx26), four of which are novel (-23G>T, I33T, 377_383dupTCCGCAT, W172R) and the remaining 14 (ivs1+1G>A, M1V, 35delG, W24X, I35S, V37I, R75W, W77X, 312del14, E120del, Q124X, Y136X, R143W, R184P) being mutations previously described. To gain insight into functional consequences of these mutations, cellular localization of the mutant proteins and their ability to permit lucifer yellow transfer between cells was studied in seven of them (W24X, I33T, I35S, R75W, E120del, W172R and R184P). I35S and R184P showed impaired trafficking of the protein to the plasma membrane. I33T, R75W, E120del and W172R showed predominantly membrane localization but did not form functional gap junction channels. Surprisingly, W24X, a protein-truncating mutation, apparently permits formation of a full-length protein, perhaps due to a stop codon read-through mechanism. These results provide further evidence that Cx26 mutations affect gap junction activity by mis-regulation at multiple levels.",1 0
"Infantile-onset glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe disease): report of a case with genetic diagnosis and pathological findings. || Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic DNA Mutational Analysis Fatal Outcome Female Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Muscle, Skeletal Mutation, Missense Myocytes, Cardiac Pedigree Pneumonia alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSD-II), also known as Pompe disease, is a rare autosomial recessive disease due to deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA). The infantile-onset form is the most severe, and most patients present with hypotonia and cardiomyopathy in early infancy. We report on a typical case of Pompe disease in a patient who died at 8 months of age due to aspiration pneumonia and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Genetic studies showed deficient GAA activity and mutation of the GAA gene with Gly615Arg (exon 13, G1845A). On autopsy, glycogen had markedly accumulated in the liver, myocardium and skeletal muscle. The neurons of the anterior horn of the spinal cord and medulla were also involved, but the cortex was spared. These neurological-histologic findings may explain the clinical features of poor motor function, decreased deep tendon reflexes and lack of mental retardation.",1
"Connexin26 mutations associated with nonsyndromic hearing loss. || Adult Alleles Asian Continental Ancestry Group Audiometry, Pure-Tone Auditory Threshold Codon Connexin 26 Connexins DNA Mutational Analysis Evoked Potentials, Auditory, Brain Stem Female Gene Deletion Genes, Recessive Hearing Disorders Humans Infant, Newborn Korea Male Mutation, Missense Pedigree Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic Prospective Studies || Mutations in the GJB2 gene are a major cause of autosomal recessive and sporadic types of congenital deafness. The 35delG mutation is the most frequent type of mutation in white populations. However, several other forms were reported, such as 167delT among Ashkenazi Jews and R143W in Africans. The present study investigated the mutations of connexin26 (Cx26) found in patients with nonsyndromic hearing loss (NSHL) and newborns in the Korean population. The sequencing data for 147 unrelated patients with congenital NSHL and 100 audiologically screened newborns were included in this prospective study. Genomic DNA samples from all patients and newborns were sequenced in both directions for detection of Cx26 mutations. Thirteen different types of mutations were found in the patients and newborns. V27I and E114G are the popular types of polymorphic mutations in both groups. 235delC-deletion and frameshift--was detected in patients (15 in 294 alleles) and newborns (1 in 200 alleles). 35delG was rarely found in both group. In addition to above mutations, several types of mutations--S85P, K41R, S72C, V84A, 176-191del, and 299-300del-were identified. The family study of the 235delC showed a typical autosomal recessive trait of NSHL in their audiological evaluation of hearing threshold. The frequency of 235delC allele showed much higher in the patients (5%) than in newborns (0.5%). We rarely found 35delC mutant in both groups. These results suggest that the different types of Cx26 mutations affect autosomal recessive NSHL according to ethnic background.",1
"Attentional bias to alcohol-related stimuli as an indicator of changes in motivation to drink. || Adult Attention Binge Drinking Blood Alcohol Content Ethanol Female Humans Male Motivation Psychomotor Performance Young Adult || Heavy drinkers show an attentional bias toward alcohol-related visual cues. A recent study in our laboratory (Weafer & Fillmore, 2013) showed that alcohol decreases attentional bias among heavy drinkers, suggesting that alcohol satiates motivation to drink in heavy drinkers. Little is known, however, about how this satiety effect might change across the time course of the blood alcohol concentration (BAC) curve. It is possible that attentional bias may return later in the time course if the satiety effect begins to diminish. The current study tested this hypothesis in a group of high-risk binge drinkers (n = 20). Participants completed a visual-probe task to measure their attentional bias and a self-report measure of their desire for alcohol after receiving 0.64 g/kg and 0.0 g/kg alcohol (placebo) during separate dose challenge sessions. The measures were obtained during the ascending limb of the BAC curve under alcohol (Test 1) and again during the descending limb (Test 2) at a comparable BAC. The measures also were obtained at the same times following placebo. Under alcohol, no attentional bias was observed during Test 1, but drinkers reported increased desire to drink. During Test 2, attentional bias was evident, but participants reported less desire to drink. Attentional bias was not correlated with desire to drink at any time point. Following placebo, attentional bias was evident during both tests. These findings show that alcohol causes a temporary reduction of attentional bias among heavy drinkers. These changes do not correspond with their self-reported motivation to drink.",1
"Pompe disease results in a Golgi-based glycosylation deficit in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes. || Blotting, Western Cells, Cultured Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Glycosylation Golgi Apparatus Humans Immunohistochemistry Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Myocytes, Cardiac || Infantile-onset Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by the complete loss of lysosomal glycogen-hydrolyzing enzyme acid α-glucosidase (GAA) activity, which results in lysosomal glycogen accumulation and prominent cardiac and skeletal muscle pathology. The mechanism by which loss of GAA activity causes cardiomyopathy is poorly understood. We reprogrammed fibroblasts from patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease to generate induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells that were differentiated to cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CM). Pompe iPSC-CMs had undetectable GAA activity and pathognomonic glycogen-filled lysosomes. Nonetheless, Pompe and control iPSC-CMs exhibited comparable contractile properties in engineered cardiac tissue. Impaired autophagy has been implicated in Pompe skeletal muscle; however, control and Pompe iPSC-CMs had comparable clearance rates of LC3-II-detected autophagosomes. Unexpectedly, the lysosome-associated membrane proteins, LAMP1 and LAMP2, from Pompe iPSC-CMs demonstrated higher electrophoretic mobility compared with control iPSC-CMs. Brefeldin A induced disruption of the Golgi in control iPSC-CMs reproduced the higher mobility forms of the LAMPs, suggesting that Pompe iPSC-CMs produce LAMPs lacking appropriate glycosylation. Isoelectric focusing studies revealed that LAMP2 has a more alkaline pI in Pompe compared with control iPSC-CMs due largely to hyposialylation. MALDI-TOF-MS analysis of N-linked glycans demonstrated reduced diversity of multiantennary structures and the major presence of a trimannose complex glycan precursor in Pompe iPSC-CMs. These data suggest that Pompe cardiomyopathy has a glycan processing abnormality and thus shares features with hypertrophic cardiomyopathies observed in the congenital disorders of glycosylation.",1
"Genetic and phenotypic aspects of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Spain: molecular survey by regions. || Genetic Testing Genotype Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Spain || We present an extensive study of the genetic diversity of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in the Spanish phenylketonuria population. We have analysed 195 PKU patients by DGGE analysis identifying 67 different mutations which represent 89% of the total mutant chromosomes. Seventeen mutations first described in Spain have not yet been detected elsewhere; ten of these are reported here for the first time. The clinical significance of this high genetic heterogeneity was examined by analysing the genotype-phenotype correlations, mainly focusing on the mild hyperphenylalaninaemia (MHP) phenotype. The genotypes found in a group of 93 MHP patients, the largest analysed so far, are described in detail, as well as the relative frequencies of the MHP mutations identified. From the total pool of mutations, 27 can be considered severe, 18 can be defined as mild and 13 as associated with MHP. The prevalent mutations correspond to one severe mutation (IVS10nt-11), one MHP mutation (A403V) and two mild mutations (165T and V388M). The high frequency of mutations with a low degree of severity can explain the relatively higher prevalence of MHP and mild PKU phenotypes in Spain compared with NOrthern European populations. We have looked at the geographical distribution in Spain of the more common mutations, finding evidence of local mutation clustering, which could be the result of differences in the ethnic background and/or of genetic drift within each region.",3 1
"Mutation analysis of SLC26A4 in mainland Chinese patients with enlarged vestibular aqueduct. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Chin Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Female Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Infant Male Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Radiography Sequence Analysis, DNA Sulfate Transporters Vestibular Aqueduct Young Adult || We have characterized the spectrum of SLC26A4 mutations and clinical features in a population of mainland Chinese patients with nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) and enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA). Cross-sectional clinical genetic study. Tertiary care outpatient otolaryngology clinic. A total of 32 subjects identified with bilateral EVA using high-resolution CT were screened for mutations in SLC26A4 by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and direct sequencing methods. A total of 13 different mutations were identified in the SLC26A4 gene, five of which are novel. A total of 88 percent of the patients harbored biallelic mutations, 11 patients were homozygotes, and 17 were compound heterozygotes. Four patients were found to carry a single SLC26A4 mutation. The IVS7-2A>G mutation was the most frequent, accounting for 60 percent of the mutant alleles. We have not found any correlations between the type of SLC26A4 mutations and the type, degree, and progression of hearing loss. There are significant proportions of patients with asymmetric (26%), progressive (32%), or fluctuating hearing loss (21%). Our data confirm the high prevalence of SLC26A4 mutations in Chinese patients with SNHL and EVA. We could not establish any relationship between genotype and phenotype. However, the high incidence of asymmetric, progressive, and fluctuating hearing loss found in the current study indicates that patients with those features should be routinely screened for SLC26A4 mutation in addition to diagnosis of EVA using CT or MRI.",1
"Auditory system involvement in late onset Pompe disease: a study of 20 Italian patients. || Acoustic Impedance Tests Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Audiometry, Pure-Tone Child Cochlea Evoked Potentials, Auditory, Brain Stem Female Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Hearing Hearing Loss, Conductive Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Middle Aged alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSD II), also known as Pompe disease, is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder caused by a reduced activity of acid alpha glucosidase (GAA). Two different clinical entities have been described: rapidly fatal infantile and late onset forms. Hearing loss has been described in classic infantile Pompe patients but rarely in late onset cases. The main purpose of this study was to investigate the involvement of the auditory system in a cohort of Italian patients with late onset GSD II. We have enrolled 20 patients, 12 males and 8 females. The auditory system assessment included speech and pure tone audiometry, impedance audiometry and auditory brainstem responses (ABR). A combined interpretation of those tests allowed us to define the origin of the hearing impairment (sensorineural, conductive or mixed). Clinically, all patients but one denied subjective hearing disturbances. On the other hand, audiological evaluation revealed that 21/40 patient ears (52.5%) had a hearing impairment: 57% had a sensorineural deficit, 33% showed a conductive hearing loss whereas 10% presented with a mixed pattern. Our study revealed that, in this group of GSDII late onset patients, the auditory system impairment was more frequently present than thought with a prominent cochlear involvement. Our results emphasize the importance of a routinely auditory function evaluation in all forms of Pompe disease.",3 1
"The conservative substitution Asp-645-->Glu in lysosomal alpha-glucosidase affects transport and phosphorylation of the enzyme in an adult patient with glycogen-storage disease type II. || Adult African Continental Ancestry Group Alleles Aspartic Acid Base Sequence Biological Transport Cells, Cultured Codon DNA Mutational Analysis Glutamates Glutamic Acid Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Lysosomes Microscopy, Immunoelectron Molecular Sequence Data Phenotype Phosphorylation Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic Protein Processing, Post-Translational Regulatory Sequences, Nucleic Acid Sequence Analysis, DNA Tunicamycin alpha-Glucosidases beta-N-Acetylhexosaminidases || Glycogen-storage disease type II (GSDII) is caused by the deficiency of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (acid maltase). This paper reports on the analysis of the mutant alleles in an American black patient with an adult form of GSDII (GM1935). The lysosomal alpha-glucosidase precursor of this patient has abnormal molecular features: (i) the molecular mass is decreased, (ii) the phosphorylation is deficient and (iii) the proteolytic processing is impaired. Sequence analysis revealed four mutations leading to amino acid alterations: Asp-645-->Glu, Val-816-->Ile, Arg-854-->Stop and Thr-927-->Ile. By using allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization on PCR-amplified cDNA we have demonstrated that the Arg-854-->Stop mutation is located in one allele that is not expressed, and that the other allele contains the remaining three mutations. Each of the mutations was introduced in wild-type cDNA and expressed in COS cells to analyse the effect on biosynthesis, transport and phosphorylation of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase. The Val-816-->Ile substitution appeared to have no significant effect in contrast with results [Martiniuk, Mehler, Bodkin, Tzall, Hirshhorn, Zhong and Hirschhorn (1991) DNA Cell Biol. 10, 681-687] and was therefore defined as a polymorphism. The Thr-927-->Ile substitution deleting one of the seven glycosylation sites was found to be responsible for the decrease in molecular-mass, but not for the deficient proteolytic processing and phosphorylation. It did not cause the enzyme deficiency either. The third mutation leading to the Asp-645-->Glu substitution was proven to account in full for the observed defects in transport, phosphorylation and proteolytic processing of the newly synthesized alpha-glucosidase precursor of the patient.",1 0
"Expressivity of hearing loss in cases with Usher syndrome type IIA. ||  || The purpose of this study was to compare the genotype/phenotype relationship between siblings with identical USH2A pathologic mutations and the consequent audiologic phenotypes, in particular degree of hearing loss (HL). Decade audiograms were also compared among two groups of affected subjects with different mutations of USH2A. DNA samples from patients with Usher syndrome type II were analysed. The audiological features of patients and affected siblings with USH2A mutations were also examined to identify genotype-phenotype correlations. Genetic and audiometric examinations were performed in 18 subjects from nine families with Usher syndrome type IIA. Three different USH2A mutations were identified in the affected subjects. Both similarities and differences of the auditory phenotype were seen in families with several affected siblings. A variable degree of hearing loss, ranging from mild to profound, was observed among affected subjects. No significant differences in hearing thresholds were found the group of affected subjects with different pathological mutations. Our results indicate that mutations in the USH2A gene and the resulting phenotype are probably modulated by other variables, such as modifying genes, epigenetics or environmental factors which may be of importance for better understanding the etiology of Usher syndrome.",2 1 3
"Long-term follow-up and outcome of phenylketonuria patients on sapropterin: a retrospective study. || Adolescent Adult Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Diet Europe Follow-Up Studies Genotype Humans Infant Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylketonurias Retrospective Studies Surveys and Questionnaires Treatment Outcome Young Adult || Sapropterin dihydrochloride, the synthetic form of 6R-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), is an approved drug for the treatment of patients with BH4-responsive phenylketonuria (PKU). The purpose of this study was to assess genotypes and data on the long-term effects of BH4/sapropterin on metabolic control and patient-related outcomes in 6 large European countries. A questionnaire was developed to assess phenotype, genotype, blood phenylalanine (Phe) levels, Phe tolerance, quality of life, mood changes, and adherence to diet in PKU patients from 16 medical centers. One hundred forty-seven patients, of whom 41.9% had mild hyperphenylalaninemia, 50.7% mild PKU, and 7.4% classic PKU, were followed up over ≤12 years. A total of 85 different genotypes were reported. With the exception of two splice variants, all of the most common mutations were reported to be associated with substantial residual Phe hydroxylase activity. Median Phe tolerance increased 3.9 times with BH4/sapropterin therapy, compared with dietary treatment, and median Phe blood concentrations were within the therapeutic range in all patients. Compared with diet alone, improvement in quality of life was reported in 49.6% of patients, improvement in adherence to diet was reported in 47% of patients, and improvement in adherence to treatment was reported in 63.3% of patients. No severe adverse events were reported. Our data document a long-term beneficial effect of orally administered BH4/sapropterin in responsive PKU patients by improving the metabolic control, increasing daily tolerance for dietary Phe intake, and for some, by improving dietary adherence and quality of life. Patient genotypes help in predicting BH4 responsiveness.",3 1
"DNA sequence analysis and genotype-phenotype assessment in 71 patients with syndromic hearing loss or auditory neuropathy. || Base Sequence DNA Genotype Hearing Hearing Loss Hearing Loss, Central Humans Mutation Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Sequence Analysis, DNA Syndrome || Aetiological assessment of 71 probands whose clinical presentation suggested a genetic syndrome or auditory neuropathy. Sanger sequencing was performed on DNA isolated from peripheral blood or lymphoblastoid cell lines. Genes were selected for sequencing based on each patient's clinical presentation and suspected diagnosis. Observed DNA sequence variations were assessed for pathogenicity by review of the scientific literature, and mutation and polymorphism databases, through the use of in silico tools including sorting intolerant from tolerant (SIFT) and polymorphism phenotyping (PolyPhen), and according to the recommendations of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics for the interpretation of DNA sequence variations. Novel DNA sequence variations were sought in controls. DNA sequencing of the coding and near-coding regions of genes relevant to each patient's clinical presentation revealed 37 sequence variations of known or uncertain pathogenicity in 9 genes from 25 patients. 14 novel sequence variations were discovered. Assessment of phenotypes revealed notable findings in 9 patients. DNA sequencing in patients whose clinical presentation suggested a genetic syndrome or auditory neuropathy provided opportunities for aetiological assessment and more precise genetic counselling of patients and families. The failure to identify a genetic aetiology in many patients in this study highlights the extreme heterogeneity of genetic hearing loss, the incompleteness of current knowledge of aetiologies of hearing loss, and the limitations of conventional DNA sequencing strategies that evaluate only coding and near-coding segments of genes.",1
"Phenylalanine hydroxylase gene mutations in the United States: report from the Maternal PKU Collaborative Study. || Alleles Base Sequence DNA Mutational Analysis DNA Primers Europe Female Gene Frequency Genetic Variation Genotype Humans Minisatellite Repeats Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias United States || The major cause of hyperphenylalaninemia is mutations in the gene encoding phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). The known mutations have been identified primarily in European patients. The purpose of this study was to determine the spectrum of mutations responsible for PAH deficiency in the United States. One hundred forty-nine patients enrolled in the Maternal PKU Collaborative Study were subjects for clinical and molecular investigations. PAH gene mutations associated with phenylketonuria (PKU) or mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP) were identified on 279 of 294 independent mutant chromosomes, a diagnostic efficiency of 95%. The spectrum is composed of 71 different mutations, including 47 missense mutations, 11 splice mutations, 5 nonsense mutations, and 8 microdeletions. Sixteen previously unreported mutations were identified. Among the novel mutations, five were found in patients with MHP, and the remainder were found in patients with PKU. The most common mutations were R408W, IVS12nt1g-->a, and Y414C, accounting for 18.7%, 7.8%, and 5.4% of the mutant chromosomes, respectively. Thirteen mutations had relative frequencies of 1%-5%, and 55 mutations each had frequencies < or = 1%. The mutational spectrum corresponded to that observed for the European ancestry of the U.S. population. To evaluate the extent of allelic variation at the PAH locus within the United States in comparison with other populations, we used allele frequencies to calculate the homozygosity for 11 populations where >90% ascertainment of mutations has been obtained. The United States was shown to contain one of the most heterogeneous populations, with homozygosity values similar to Sicily and ethnically mixed sample populations in Europe. The extent of allelic heterogeneity must be a major determining factor in the choice of mutation-detection methodology for molecular diagnosis in PAH deficiency.",3 1
"A mutational analysis of the SLC26A4 gene in Spanish hearing-impaired families provides new insights into the genetic causes of Pendred syndrome and DFNB4 hearing loss. || Family Female Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Pedigree Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Vestibular Aqueduct || Pendred syndrome (PS) and DFNB4, a non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss with enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct (EVA), are caused by mutations in the SLC26A4 gene. Both disorders are recessive, and yet only one mutated SLC26A4 allele, or no mutations, are identified in many cases. Here we present the genetic characterization of 105 Spanish patients from 47 families with PS or non-syndromic EVA and 20 families with recessive non-syndromic hearing loss, which segregated with the DFNB4 locus. In this cohort, two causative SLC26A4 mutations could be characterized in 18 families (27%), whereas a single mutated allele was found in a patient with unilateral hearing loss and EVA in the same ear. In all, 24 different causative mutations were identified, including eight novel mutations. The novel p.Q514K variant was the most prevalent mutation in SLC26A4, accounting for 17% (6/36) of the mutated alleles identified in this study, deriving from a founder effect. We also characterized a novel multiexon 14 kb deletion spanning from intron 3 to intron 6 (g.8091T_22145Cdel). This study also revealed the first case of a de novo recessive mutation p.Q413P causing PS that arose in the proband's paternal allele, the maternal one carrying the p.L445W. The relevance of our results for genetic diagnosis of PS and non-syndromic EVA hearing loss is discussed.",1
"Can genes influencing muscle function affect the therapeutic response to enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) in late-onset type II glycogenosis? || Actinin Adult Age of Onset Aged Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal PPAR alpha Peptidyl-Dipeptidase A Polymorphism, Genetic Treatment Outcome || The purpose of this study is to analyze the role of genes known to influence muscle performances on the outcome after enzyme replacement treatment (ERT) in type II Glycogenosis (GSDII). We analyzed 16 patients receiving ERT for ≥two years. We assessed the changes in muscle strength by hand-held dynamometry, muscle mass by quantitative MRI, and resistance to exercise by the 6-minute walking test. Exercise gene assessment included angiotensin converting enzyme insertion/deletion polymorphism (ACE), alpha-actinin3 R577X polymorphism (ACTN3), and peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha G/C polymorphism (PPARα). Independent of disease severity, one third of patients had a poor response to ERT, which was found to be associated with ACE DD genotype. The ACTN3 null polymorphism appeared to exert a positive effect on treatment efficacy, while PPARα did not seem to exert any influence at all. We conclude that poor treatment outcome in ACE DD genotypes is in line with previous observation of a worse disease course in this subpopulation, and suggests the need for a more careful follow-up and individualized treatment approaches for these patients. Exercise genes may provide a new opportunity for studying the outcome after treatment and the muscle regeneration abilities in other models of genetic myopathies.",1
"Molecular basis of phenylketonuria in Cuba. ||  || In this study we report the mutation analysis performed in Cuban PKU patients using DGGE and direct sequencing. Sixteen different mutations have been detected, which account for 91% of the total mutant alleles. Haplotype analysis and genealogical data support the European (mainly Spanish) origin of the mutations. Two mutations were found at unexpectedly high frequencies, E280K and R261Q, possibly due to consanguinity and genetic drift, among other factors. Hum Mutat 18:252, 2001.",1
"Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in the Slovak population: genotype-phenotype correlations and genotype-based predictions of BH4-responsiveness. || Alleles Base Sequence Biopterin Chromosome Breakpoints European Continental Ancestry Group Gene Deletion Gene Frequency Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Mutation Mutation Rate Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Prognosis Slovakia Treatment Outcome || We investigated the mutation spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) in a cohort of patients from 135 Slovak PKU families. Mutational screening of the known coding region, including conventional intron splice sites, was performed using high-resolution melting analysis, with subsequent sequencing analysis of the samples showing deviated melting profiles compared to control samples. The PAH gene was also screened for deletions and duplications using MLPA analysis. Forty-eight different disease causing mutations were identified in our patient group, including 30 missense, 8 splicing, 7 nonsense, 2 large deletions and 1 small deletion with frameshift; giving a detection rate of 97.6%. The most prevalent mutation was the p.R408W, occurring in 47% of all alleles, which concurs with results from neighboring and other Slavic countries. Other frequent mutations were: p.R158Q (5.3%), IVS12+1G>A (5.3%), p.R252W (5.1%), p.R261Q (3.9%) and p.A403V (3.6%). We also identified three novel missense mutations: p.F233I, p.R270I, p.F331S and one novel variant: c.-30A>T in the proximal part of the PAH gene promoter. A spectrum of 84 different genotypes was observed and a genotype based predictions of BH4-responsiveness were assessed. Among all genotypes, 36 were predicted to be BH4-responsive represented by 51 PKU families. In addition, genotype-phenotype correlations were performed.",3 1
"Identification and Functional Characterization of GAA Mutations in Colombian Patients Affected by Pompe Disease. ||  || Pompe disease (PD) is a recessive metabolic disorder characterized by acid α-glucosidase (GAA) deficiency, which results in lysosomal accumulation of glycogen in all tissues, especially in skeletal muscles. PD clinical course is mainly determined by the nature of the GAA mutations. Although ~400 distinct GAA sequence variations have been described, the genotype-phenotype correlation is not always evident.In this study, we describe the first clinical and genetic analysis of Colombian PD patients performed in 11 affected individuals. GAA open reading frame sequencing revealed eight distinct mutations related to PD etiology including two novel missense mutations, c.1106 T > C (p.Leu369Pro) and c.2236 T > C (p.Trp746Arg). In vitro functional studies showed that the structural changes conferred by both mutations did not inhibit the synthesis of the 110 kD GAA precursor form but affected the processing and intracellular transport of GAA. In addition, analysis of previously described variants located at this position (p.Trp746Gly, p.Trp746Cys, p.Trp746Ser, p.Trp746X) revealed new insights in the molecular basis of PD. Notably, we found that p.Trp746Cys mutation, which was previously described as a polymorphism as well as a causal mutation, displayed a mild deleterious effect. Interestingly and by chance, our study argues in favor of a remarkable Afro-American and European ancestry of the Colombian population. Taken together, our report provides valuable information on the PD genotype-phenotype correlation, which is expected to facilitate and improve genetic counseling of affected individuals and their families.",1 0
"Clinical features of patients with GJB2 (connexin 26) mutations: severity of hearing loss is correlated with genotypes and protein expression patterns. || Adolescent Adult Case-Control Studies Child Child, Preschool Connexin 26 Connexins DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Hearing Loss Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Middle Aged Phenotype Prognosis Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Severity of Illness Index || Mutations in the GJB2 (connexin 26, Cx26) gene are the major cause of nonsyndromic hearing impairment in many populations. Genetic testing offers opportunities to determine the cause of deafness and predict the course of hearing, enabling the prognostication of language development. In the current study, we compared severity of hearing impairment in 60 patients associated with biallelic GJB2 mutations and assessed the correlation of genotypes and phenotypes. Within a spectrum of GJB2 mutations found in the Japanese population, the phenotype of the most prevalent mutation, 235delC, was found to show more severe hearing impairment than that of V37I, which is the second most frequent mutation. The results of the present study, taken together with phenotypes caused by other types of mutations, support the general rule that phenotypes caused by the truncating GJB2 mutations are more severe than those caused by missense mutations. The present in vitro study further confirmed that differences in phenotypes could be explained by the protein expression pattern.",1 4
"Chinese hamster ovary cell-derived recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase in infantile-onset Pompe disease. || Body Height Body Weight Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Development Europe Female Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Hearing Disorders Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Infusions, Intravenous Male Muscle Hypotonia Muscle, Skeletal Respiration, Artificial Treatment Outcome United States alpha-Glucosidases || To conduct an open-label, multinational, multicenter study examining the safety and efficacy of recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase (rhGAA) in treatment of infantile-onset Pompe disease. We enrolled 8 infant patients who had Pompe disease with GAA activity <1% of normal, cardiomyopathy, and hypotonia. In the 52-week initial phase, rhGAA was infused intravenously at 10 mg/kg weekly; an extension phase continued survivors' treatment with 10 to 20 mg/kg of rhGAA weekly or 20 mg/kg every 2 weeks for as long as 153 weeks. Safety measurements included adverse events, laboratory tests, and anti-rhGAA antibody titers. Efficacy evaluations included survival, ventilator use, echocardiograms, growth, and motor and cognitive function. After 52 weeks of treatment, 6 of 8 patients were alive, and 5 patients were free of invasive ventilator support. Clinical improvements included ameliorated cardiomyopathy and improved growth and cognition. Five patients acquired new motor milestones; 3 patients walked independently. Four patients died after the initial study phase; the median age at death or treatment withdrawal for all patients was 21.7 months, significantly later than expected for patients who were not treated. Treatment was safe and well tolerated; no death was drug-related. rhGAA improved ventilator-free survival, cardiomyopathy, growth, and motor function in patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease compared with outcomes expected for patients without treatment.",3 1
"Identification of three novel mutations in Korean phenylketonuria patients: R53H, N207D, and Y325X. ||  || ",3 1
"[Clinical and molecular genetic study on two patients of the juvenile form of Pompe disease in China]. ||  || Glycogen-storage disease type II (GSD II, Pompe's disease) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a functional deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) that leads to glycogen accumulation within lysosomes in most tissues. The GAA gene is located to human chromosome 17q25 and contains 20 exons, 19 of which are coding. Clinically, patients with the severe infantile form of GSD II have muscle weakness and cardiomyopathy eventually leading to death before the age of two years. Patients with the juvenile or the adult form of GSD II present with myopathy with a slow progression over several years or decades. A broad genetic heterogeneity has been described in GSD II in Europe, South Africa, USA, Japan and Korea, however, the investigation has not been performed in the patients from the mainland of China. In this study, clinical analysis and mutation detection were done on Chinese patients. Two unrelated juvenile patients with late onset GSD II (one boy, 3 years old and one girl, 9 years old) were included in the study with the informed consents. The diagnosis was confirmed by alpha-glucosidase determination in cultured fibroblasts. In addition, their clinical presentation, laboratory findings, electrophysiologic studies and muscle biopsy findings were analyzed in detail. Genomic DNA samples were extracted from fibroblasts of the probands, from peripheral blood of their parents and 50 unrelated, normal individuals. All the coding 19 exons and exon-intron boundaries of GAA were detected in the proband by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and direct sequencing. One patient presented decrease of muscle strength, limb-girdle hypotonia, the other patient presented reduced muscle volumes and respiratory problems. Both had increased CPK value, myopathic pattern on EMG; vacuoles on muscle biopsy, and deficiency of 1, 4-alpha-glucosidase activity. After 1 year follow up, the girl died after pneumonia at 10 years of age. One patient was found to be compound heretozygote for the novel mutation Arg702His, and the previously reported mutation Pro266Ser, which was reported in Korean population, with the late-onset phenotype. Two novel missense mutations Thr711Arg, Val723Met were found on the other patients. Three mutations identified in the patient were new missense mutations causing late onset GSD II, which had not been reported elsewhere before.",1
"Whole-body muscle MRI in 20 patients suffering from late onset Pompe disease: Involvement patterns. || Adult Aged Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Image Processing, Computer-Assisted Longitudinal Studies Lung Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Middle Aged Motor Activity Muscle, Skeletal Respiratory Muscles Severity of Illness Index Whole Body Imaging || To describe muscle involvement on whole-body MRI scans in adult patients at different stages of late-onset Pompe disease. Twenty patients aged 37 to 75 were examined. Five were bedridden and required ventilatory support. Axial and coronal T1 turbo-spin-echo sequences were performed on 1.5T or 3T systems. MRI was scored for 47 muscles using Mercuri's classification. Whole-body scans were obtained with a mean in-room time of 29 min. Muscle changes consisted of internal bright signals of fatty replacement without severe retraction of the muscles' corpus. Findings were consistent with previous descriptions of spine extensors and pelvic girdle, but also provided new information on recurrent muscle changes particularly in the tongue and subscapularis muscle. Moreover thigh involvement was more heterogeneous than previously described, in terms of distribution across muscles as well as with respect to the overall clinical presentation. Whole-body MRI provides a very evocative description of muscle involvement in Pompe disease in adults.",1
"Mutation profile of the GAA gene in 40 Italian patients with late onset glycogen storage disease type II. ||  || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII) is a recessively inherited disorder due to the deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) that results in impaired glycogen degradation and its accumulation in the lysosomes. We report here the complete molecular analysis of the GAA gene performed on 40 Italian patients with late onset GSDII. Twelve novel alleles have been identified: missense mutations were functionally characterized by enzyme activity and protein processing in a human GAA-deficient cell line while splicing mutations were studied by RT-PCR and in silico analysis. A complex allele was also identified carrying three different alterations in cis. The c.-32-13T > G was the most frequent mutation, present as compound heterozygote in 85% of the patients (allele frequency 42.3%), as described in other late onset GSDII Caucasian populations. Interestingly, the c.-32-13T > G was associated with the c.2237G > A (p.W746X) in nine of the 40 patients. Genotype-phenotype correlations are discussed with particular emphasis on the subgroup carrying the c.-32-13T > G/c.2237G > A genotype.",3 1 0
"Autophagy in Natural History and After ERT in Glycogenosis Type II. ||  || We studied the role of autophagy in a series of 10 infantile-, juvenile-, and adult-onset GSDII patients and investigated autophagy blockade in successive biopsies of adult cases during disease natural history. We also correlated the autophagosome accumulation and efficiency of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) in four treated cases (two infantile and two juvenile-adult onsets).The autophagic flux was monitored by measuring the amount of p62-positive protein aggregates and compared, together with fibre vacuolisation, to fibre atrophy.A blocked autophagic flux resulted in p62 accumulation, increased vacuolisation, and progressive atrophy of muscle fibres in biopsies collected from patients during natural history. On the contrary, in the GSDII cases early treated with ERT, the autophagic flux improved and muscle fibre atrophy, fibre vacuolisation, and acid phosphatase activity decreased.The functionality of the autophagy-lysosome system is essential in GSDII muscle, which is characterised by the presence of swollen glycogen-filled lysosomes and autophagic build-up. Defining the role of autophagy and its relationship with muscle loss is critical for understanding the disease pathogenesis, for developing new therapies, and for improving ERT efficacy in GSDII.",3 1
"Observational clinical study of 22 adult-onset Pompe disease patients undergoing enzyme replacement therapy over 5years. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Kidney Function Tests Male Middle Aged Motor Activity Respiratory Function Tests Retrospective Studies Treatment Outcome Young Adult || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive disease resulting from deficiency of the acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA). The late-onset Pompe Disease (LOPD) patients develop muscular and respiratory complications later in life. We describe a retrospective observational cohort study including 22 patients with LOPD. The cohort was assessed at baseline before Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT) with alglucosidase alpha (20mg/kg biweekly) was commenced and subsequently relevant information was collected at 2, 4 and 5years later. The median age of the patients at study entry was 44years (16-64years), with median disease duration of 11.5years (4-31years). At baseline, 10 patients (45%) could walk without support, 12 (55%) could walk with unilateral or bilateral support including 3/12 were wheelchair bound. Mean predicted FVC % was 55.7 (95% CI 45-66) of predicted normal at baseline and showed no significant change after 5years (54.6 (95% CI 43-66)), (all p=0.9815). Mean FVC % supine was 41.8 (95% CI 33.8-49) of predicted normal at baseline and remained significantly unchanged at 5years (48.4 (95% CI 37-59.6)), (all p=0.8680). The overnight non-invasive ventilator dependence increased by 18.2% as compared with baseline and requirement of mobility aids increased during this period by 5.2% as compared with the baseline. Mean walking distance at 6min walk test was 411.5 (95% CI 338-485) at baseline, 266.5 (95% CI 187-346) m at 2years, 238.6 (95% CI 162-315) m at 4years and 286.8 (95% CI 203-370) m at 5years (p=0.1981; ANOVA was completed only for 14 patients). A gradual decline in FVC% predicted was noted only in four cases and a decline in FVC% supine in two other. Only one patient showed a decline in both pulmonary function tests. In all remaining cases (17/22) respiratory function remains stable. In conclusion overall pulmonary function tests and mobility remained stable for 5years in majority of patients on ERT. However, in some patients they continued to decline in spite of ERT resulting in increased number of patients requiring ventilation and increase wheel chair dependence at the end of 5years.",1
"Mutation analysis of PAH gene in patients with PKU in western Iran and its association with polymorphisms: identification of four novel mutations. || Adolescent Alleles Child Child, Preschool Codon, Nonsense Consanguinity DNA Mutational Analysis Ethnic Groups European Continental Ancestry Group Exons Female Gene Frequency Human Migration Humans Introns Iran Male Mediterranean Region Mutation Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Sequence Analysis, DNA Sequence Deletion Young Adult || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by a mutation in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. Untreated PKU can lead to mental retardation, seizures, and other serious medical problems. This study was designed to investigate the status of molecular defects in the PAH gene and their association with polymorphisms in Kurdish patients with PKU in the Kermanshah province, western Iran. The study was conducted on 27 unrelated patients with PKU over a 2-year period (from 2010 to 2012). All 13 exons plus exon-intron boundaries of the PAH gene were analyzed and we identified 15 different mutations, including two novel mutations, in 51 of the 54 mutant alleles (diagnostic efficiency of 94.4 %). IVS4 + 1G > C (c.441 + 1G > C) and IVS7 - 5 T > C (c.843 - 5 T > C) are novel mutations that have not been reported in the academic literature or the PAH locus database ( http://www.pahdb.mcgill.ca ); therefore, they may be specific to the Kurdish population. IVS2 + 5G > C and IVS9 + 5G > A were the two most prevalent mutations in our sample, with frequencies of 26 % and 17 %, respectively. The second most common mutations were p.R261X, IVS10 - 11G > A, p.K363 > Nfs and IVS7 - 5 T > C, with each showing a relative frequency of 7.4 %. All other detected mutations, including p.F55 > Lfs, p.R176X, p.R243Q, p.V230I, p.R243X, p.R261Q, IVS8 - 7A > G and p.E390G had frequencies of less than 4 %. The present study showed that there is a distinct difference in the characteristics of PAH mutations between the Kermanshah province and other parts of Iran, suggesting that Kermanshah may have a unique population distribution of PAH gene mutations. Iran lies on the route of major ancient movements of the Caucasian people toward the Mediterranean basin, and Kermanshah has previously been called the gateway to Asia. Most of the mutations identified in this study are common in the Mediterranean region. Therefore, our findings are consistent with the historical and geographical links between the Iranian population and the populations of Mediterranean region.",1
"Biochemical characterization of mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase enzymes and correlation with clinical presentation in hyperphenylalaninaemic patients. ||  || The biochemical properties of mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) enzymes and clinical characteristics of hyperphenylalaninaemic patients who bear these mutant enzymes were investigated. Biochemical characterization of mutant PAH enzymes p.D143G, p.R155H, p.L348V, p.R408W and p.P416Q included determination of specific activity, substrate activation, V(max), K(m) for (6R)-L-erythro-5,6,7,8-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)), K (d) for BH(4), and protein stabilization by BH(4). Clinical data from 22 patients either homozygous, functionally hemizygous, or compound heterozygous for the mutant enzymes of interest were correlated with biochemical parameters of the mutant enzymes. The p.L348V and p.P416Q enzymes retain significant catalytic activity yet were observed in classic and moderate PKU patients. Biochemical studies demonstrated that BH(4) rectified the stability defects in p.L348V and p.P416Q; additionally, patients with these variants responded to BH(4) therapy. The p.R155H mutant displayed low PAH activity and decreased apparent affinity for L-Phe yet was observed in mild hyperphenylalaninaemia. The p.R155H mutant does not display kinetic instability, as it is stabilized by BH(4) similarly to wild-type PAH; thus the residual activity is available under physiological conditions. The p.R408W enzyme is dysfunctional in nearly all biochemical parameters, as evidenced by disease severity in homozygous and hemizygous patients. Biochemical assessment of mutant PAH proteins, especially parameters involving interaction with BH(4) that impact protein folding, appear useful in clinical correlation. As additional patients and mutant proteins are assessed, the utility of this approach will become apparent.",2 1
"Abnormalities of cerebral arteries are frequent in patients with late-onset Pompe disease. || Adult Aged Cerebral Arterial Diseases Cerebral Arteries Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Magnetic Resonance Angiography Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Middle Aged Muscle, Smooth Radiography || Cerebral aneurysms and arteropathies causing severe cerebrovascular events have been reported as rare complications in patients with late-onset Pompe disease. We investigated the frequency of cerebrovascular anomalies in six patients with late-onset Pompe disease followed at our institution. Clinical data collection and magnetic resonance angiography were performed as part of routine annual examinations. Four out of six patients had brain vascular anomalies including dolichoectasia of the basilar artery and ectasia of internal carotids. These patients also complained of gastrointestinal symptoms (chronic constipation and gastrointestinal reflux). Two patients had clinical signs related to the arteriopathy, including partial paralysis of the third cranial nerve and transient ischemic attacks. At 1 year follow-up, enzyme replacement therapy did not modify the size of cerebral vessels, but patients reported a marked improvement of intestinal symptoms. In conclusion, neurologists should be aware that intracranial artery abnormalities are not infrequent in patients with late-onset Pompe disease, and they should be specifically investigated in the presence of unexplained CNS symptoms.",1
"Pompe disease: dramatic improvement in gastrointestinal function following enzyme replacement therapy. A report of three later-onset patients. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Gastrointestinal Diseases Gastrointestinal Tract Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Middle Aged alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is a lysosomal storage disease due to deficient acid α-glucosidase (GAA) activity. Infants with the classic infantile-onset subtype present with severe hypotonia and cardiomegaly, and most expire in the first year of life, whereas the severity of the muscle-based manifestations in patients with the late infantile/juvenile and adult-onset subtypes depends on the level of GAA residual enzymatic activity. The clinical features of later-onset Pompe disease are still emerging, and even the natural history and progression of muscle weakness and respiratory failure, hallmarks of the later-onset subtypes, are not well documented. For example, we report here three later-onset patients who had chronic diarrhea, postprandial bloating and abdominal pain, previously unrecognized manifestations of later-onset Pompe disease. Two patients had intestinal incontinence and one reported synchronous vomiting and diarrhea on a daily basis. These symptoms significantly interfered with their quality of life, often limiting their ability to leave home. All gastrointestinal symptoms resolved within the first six months of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with recombinant human alglucosidase alpha (rhGAA). All three patients gained weight and remain symptom free, two for over four years. Thus, gastrointestinal symptoms occur in later-onset patients with Pompe disease and are resolved with ERT.",1
"Glycogen Storage Disease type II: genetic and biochemical analysis of novel mutations in infantile patients from Turkish ancestry. ||  || Glycogen Storage Disease type II (GSDII) is caused by the deficiency of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (acid maltase). This paper reports on the characterization of the molecular defects in 6 infantile patients from Turkish ancestry. Five of the 6 patients had reduced levels of the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase precursor. Conversion to mature enzyme was impaired in all cases, and the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase activity in all patients fibroblasts was less than 0.5% of control. DNA sequence analysis revealed 3 new mutations. One mutation, found in 3 patients in homozygous form, was a double insertion in exon 19 (2471AG-->CAGG) leading to a frameshift after Pro 913. It is the first insertion mutation described in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene. Two patients were homozygous for missense mutations leading to the substitution of Ser to Pro at amino acid 566 (S566P) in one case and of Pro to Arg at amino acid 768 (P768R) in the other. One patient was found to have a Gly to Arg missense mutation at amino acid 643 (G643R), previously identified in an adult patient (Hermans et al., 1993), combined with a silent second allele. The latter 3 mutations were introduced in the wild type lysosomal alpha-glucosidase cDNA and expressed in COS cells to analyze their effect. Precursor species of 110 kD were formed but the maturation was impaired. As a result there was an overall deficiency of catalytic activity, which is in accordance with the findings in the patients fibroblasts and with the clinical phenotype.",1 0
