Abstract,Classification
"Functional assessment of variants in the TSC1 and TSC2 genes identified in individuals with Tuberous Sclerosis Complex. || Cells, Cultured Genetic Variation Humans Models, Genetic Tuberous Sclerosis Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 1 Protein Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 2 Protein Tumor Suppressor Proteins || The effects of missense changes and small in-frame deletions and insertions on protein function are not easy to predict, and the identification of such variants in individuals at risk of a genetic disease can complicate genetic counselling. One option is to perform functional tests to assess whether the variants affect protein function. We have used this strategy to characterize variants identified in the TSC1 and TSC2 genes in individuals with, or suspected of having, Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC). Here we present an overview of our functional studies on 45 TSC1 and 107 TSC2 variants. Using a standardized protocol we classified 16 TSC1 variants and 70 TSC2 variants as pathogenic. In addition we identified eight putative splice site mutations (five TSC1 and three TSC2). The remaining 24 TSC1 and 34 TSC2 variants were classified as probably neutral.",0
"Mapping the functional landscape of frequent phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotypes promotes personalised medicine in phenylketonuria. || Europe Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Middle East Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Precision Medicine || In phenylketonuria, genetic heterogeneity, frequent compound heterozygosity, and the lack of functional data for phenylalanine hydroxylase genotypes hamper reliable phenotype prediction and individualised treatment. A literature search revealed 690 different phenylalanine hydroxylase genotypes in 3066 phenylketonuria patients from Europe and the Middle East. We determined phenylalanine hydroxylase function of 30 frequent homozygous and compound heterozygous genotypes covering 55% of the study population, generated activity landscapes, and assessed the phenylalanine hydroxylase working range in the metabolic (phenylalanine) and therapeutic (tetrahydrobiopterin) space. Shared patterns in genotype-specific functional landscapes were linked to biochemical and pharmacological phenotypes, where (1) residual activity below 3.5% was associated with classical phenylketonuria unresponsive to pharmacological treatment; (2) lack of defined peak activity induced loss of response to tetrahydrobiopterin; (3) a higher cofactor need was linked to inconsistent clinical phenotypes and low rates of tetrahydrobiopterin response; and (4) residual activity above 5%, a defined peak of activity, and a normal cofactor need were associated with pharmacologically treatable mild phenotypes. In addition, we provide a web application for retrieving country-specific information on genotypes and genotype-specific phenylalanine hydroxylase function that warrants continuous extension, updates, and research on demand. The combination of genotype-specific functional analyses with biochemical, clinical, and therapeutic data of individual patients may serve as a powerful tool to enable phenotype prediction and to establish personalised medicine strategies for dietary regimens and pharmacological treatment in phenylketonuria.",3 1 0
"The mutant genotype is the main determinant of the metabolic phenotype in phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. || Alleles Amino Acid Substitution Animals COS Cells Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic Genotype Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Phenylketonuria and mild hyperphenylalaninemias are allelic disorders caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. Following identification of the disease-causing mutation in 11 PAH-deficient patients, we tested the activity of the mutant gene products in an eukaryotic expression system. Two mutations markedly reduced PAH activity (A259V and L333F), one mutation mildly altered the enzyme activity (E390G), while the majority of mutant genotypes reduced the in vitro expression of PAH activity to 15-30% of controls. Comparing the predicted residual activity derived from expression studies to the clinical phenotypes of our PAH-deficient patients, we found that homozygosity for the L333F and E390G mutations resulted in severe and mild PAH deficiencies, respectively, both in vivo and in vitro, while compound heterozygosity (L333F/E390G) resulted in an intermediate dietary tolerance. Similarly, in vitro expression studies largely predicted dietary tolerance in compound heterozygotes for the A259V/IVS12nt1 (typical PKU), A259V/A403V, G218V/I65T, and G218V/R158Q mutations (mild variants). Taken together, these results support the view that expression studies are useful in predicting residual enzyme activity and that the mutant genotype at the PAH locus is the major determinant of metabolic phenotype in hyperphenylalaninemias.",3 1 0
"The LDL receptor locus in familial hypercholesterolemia: mutational analysis of a membrane protein. || Animals DNA Mutational Analysis Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Multigene Family Mutation Receptors, LDL || ",4 0
Phenylketonuria in China: identification and characterization of three novel nucleotide substitutions in the human phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. ||  || ,0
"Mean age-of-onset of familial alzheimer disease caused by presenilin mutations correlates with both increased Abeta42 and decreased Abeta40. ||  || The varied ways in which mutations in presenilins (PSEN1 and PSEN2) affect amyloid b precursor protein (APP) processing in causing early-onset familial Alzheimer disease (FAD) are complex and not yet properly understood. Nonetheless, one useful diagnostic marker is an increased ratio of Ab42 to Ab40 (Ab42/Ab40) in patients' brain and biological fluids as well as in transgenic mice and cells. We studied Ab and APP processing for a set of nine clinical PSEN mutations on a novel and highly reproducible enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)-based in vitro method and also sought correlation with brain Ab analyzed by image densitometry and mass spectrometry. All mutations significantly increased Ab42/Ab40 in vitro by significantly decreasing Ab40 with accumulation of APP C-terminal fragments, a sign of decreased PSEN activity. A significant increase in absolute levels of Ab42 was observed for only half of the mutations tested. We also showed that age-of-onset of PSEN1-linked FAD correlated inversely with Ab42/Ab40 (r = -0.89; P = 0.001) and absolute levels of Ab42 (r = -0.83; P = 0.006), but directly with Ab40 levels (r = 0.69; P = 0.035). These changes also partly correlated with brain Ab42 and Ab40 levels. Together, our data suggested that Ab40 might be protective by perhaps sequestering the more toxic Ab42 and facilitating its clearance. Also, the in vitro method we describe here is a valid tool for assaying the pathogenic potential of clinical PSEN mutations in a molecular diagnostic setting.",0
"Long term clinical history of an Italian cohort of infantile onset Pompe disease treated with enzyme replacement therapy. || Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Italy Male Recombinant Proteins Retrospective Studies alpha-Glucosidases || Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has deeply modified the clinical history of Infantile Onset Pompe Disease (IOPD). However, its long-term effectiveness is still not completely defined. Available data shows a close relationship between clinical outcome and patients' cross-reactive immunological status (CRIM), being CRIM-negative status a negative prognostic factor. At the same time limited data are available on the long-term treatment in CRIM-positive infants. A retrospective multicentre observational study was designed to analyse the long-term effectiveness of ERT in IOPD. Thirteen Italian centres spread throughout the country were involved and a cohort of 28 patients (15 females, 13 males, born in the period: February 2002-January 2013) was enrolled. IOPD diagnosis was based on clinical symptoms, enzymatic and molecular analysis. All patients received ERT within the first year of life. Clinical, laboratory, and functional data (motor, cardiac and respiratory) were collected and followed for a median period of 71 months (5 years 11 months). Median age at onset, diagnosis and start of ERT were 2, 3 and 4 months, respectively. CRIM status was available for 24/28 patients: 17/24 (71%) were CRIM-positive. Nineteen patients (67%) survived > 2 years: 4 were CRIM-negative, 14 CRIM-positive and one unknown. Six patients (5 CRIM-positive and one unknown) never needed ventilation support (21,4%) and seven (6 CRIM-positive and one unknown: 25%) developed independent ambulation although one subsequently lost this function. Brain imaging study was performed in 6 patients and showed peri-ventricular white matter abnormalities in all of them. Clinical follow-up confirmed the better prognosis for CRIM-positive patients, though a slow, progressive worsening of motor and/or respiratory functions was detected in 8 patients. These data are the result of the longest independent retrospective study on ERT in IOPD reported so far outside clinical trials. The data obtained confirmed the better outcome of the CRIM-positive patients but at the same time, showed the inability of the current therapeutic approach to reverse or stabilize the disease progression. The results also evidenced the involvement of central nervous system in Pompe disease. To better understand the disease clinical history and to improve treatment efficacy larger multicentre studies are needed as well as the development of new therapeutic approaches.",1 0
"PTEN c.511C>T nonsense mutation in a BRRS family disrupts a potential exonic splicing enhancer and causes exon skipping. || Exons Female Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phenotype RNA Splicing Regulatory Sequences, Ribonucleic Acid || Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by macrocephaly, intestinal hamartomatous polyps, lipomas and pigmented macules of the glans penis. We identified a Thai family affected with BRRS. In addition to typical manifestations of BRRS, the proband has a large hepatic AVM which is rarely found in BRRS. The molecular analysis revealed affected members were heterozygous for an exon skipping-associated nonsense mutation c.511C>T in the PTEN gene. The mutation was previously assumed to be deleterious by causing a change to a termination codon, Q171X. We, herein, found that another pathogenic effect was splicing related by disrupting a potential exonic splicing enhancer (ESE) and causing an entire exon 6 skipping. The results prompted us to investigate other reported missense/nonsense mutations in the PTEN gene. We found that they do not colocalize with ESE sites, suggesting that most of their pathogenic effects are not through ESE disruption.",3 0
"Splicing mutations in glycogen-storage disease type II: evaluation of the full spectrum of mutations and their relation to patients' phenotypes. || Cell Line Computational Biology DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Introns Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation Phenotype RNA Splicing alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen-storage disease type II is an autosomal recessive-inherited disorder due to the deficiency of acid α-glucosidase. A large number of mutations in the acid α-glucosidase gene have been described to date. Among them, ~15% are variations that may affect mRNA splicing process. In this study, we have for the first time comprehensively reviewed the available information on splicing mutations of the acid α-glucosidase gene and we have evaluated their possible impact on the splicing process using different in silico approaches. Out of the 39 different GAA-sequence variations described, an in silico analysis using seven different programs showed that 97% of them are predicted to have an impact on the splicing process. Moreover, this analysis showed a quite good correlation between the impact of the mutation on the splicing process and the clinical phenotype. In addition, we have performed the functional characterization of three novel sequence variants found in Italian patients and still uncharacterized. Using a minigene system, we have confirmed their pathogenic nature. In conclusion, this study has shown that in silico analysis represents a useful tool to select mutations that affect the splicing process of the acid α-glucosidase gene and provides an updated picture of all this kind of mutations reported till now.",0
"The pharmacological chaperone 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin increases alpha-galactosidase A levels in Fabry patient cell lines. ||  || Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by mutations in the gene encoding alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A), with consequent accumulation of its major glycosphingolipid substrate, globotriaosylceramide (GL-3). Over 500 Fabry mutations have been reported; approximately 60% are missense. The iminosugar 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin (DGJ, migalastat hydrochloride, AT1001) is a pharmacological chaperone that selectively binds alpha-Gal A, increasing physical stability, lysosomal trafficking, and cellular activity. To identify DGJ-responsive mutant forms of alpha-Gal A, the effect of DGJ incubation on alpha-Gal A levels was assessed in cultured lymphoblasts from males with Fabry disease representing 75 different missense mutations, one insertion, and one splice-site mutation. Baseline alpha-Gal A levels ranged from 0 to 52% of normal. Increases in alpha-Gal A levels (1.5- to 28-fold) after continuous DGJ incubation for 5 days were seen for 49 different missense mutant forms with varying EC(50) values (820 nmol/L to >1 mmol/L). Amino acid substitutions in responsive forms were located throughout both structural domains of the enzyme. Half of the missense mutant forms associated with classic (early-onset) Fabry disease and a majority (90%) associated with later-onset Fabry disease were responsive. In cultured fibroblasts from males with Fabry disease, the responses to DGJ were comparable to those of lymphoblasts with the same mutation. Importantly, elevated GL-3 levels in responsive Fabry fibroblasts were reduced after DGJ incubation, indicating that increased mutant alpha-Gal A levels can reduce accumulated substrate. These data indicate that DGJ merits further evaluation as a treatment for patients with Fabry disease with various missense mutations.",0
"Identification of CDH1 germline missense mutations associated with functional inactivation of the E-cadherin protein in young gastric cancer probands. || Adult Animals CHO Cells Cadherins Carbohydrate Dehydrogenases Cricetinae Female Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Stomach Neoplasms || E-cadherin is involved in the formation of cell-junctions and the maintenance of epithelial integrity. Direct evidence of E-cadherin mutations triggering tumorigenesis has come from the finding of inactivating germline mutations of the gene (CDH1) in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). We screened a series of 66 young gastric cancer probands for germline CDH1 mutations, and two novel missense alterations together with an intronic variant were identified. We then analysed the functional significance of the two exonic missense variants found here as well as a third germline missense variant that we previously identified in a HGDC family. cDNAs encoding either the wild-type protein or mutant forms of E-cadherin were stably transfected into CHO (Chinese hamster ovary) E-cadherin-negative cells. Transfected cell-lines were characterized in terms of aggregation, motility and invasion. We show that a proportion of apparently sporadic early-onset diffuse gastric carcinomas are associated with germline alterations of the E-cadherin gene. We also demonstrate that a proportion of missense variants are associated with significant functional consequences, suggesting that our cell model can be used as an adjunct in deciding on the potential pathogenic role of identified E-cadherin germline alterations.",0
"Missense mutations in the N-terminal domain of human phenylalanine hydroxylase interfere with binding of regulatory phenylalanine. || Amino Acid Sequence Animals Binding Sites Conserved Sequence DNA Mutational Analysis Humans Models, Molecular Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Prephenate Dehydratase Protein Binding Protein Conformation Protein Structure, Tertiary Rats Recombinant Fusion Proteins Sequence Alignment || Hyperphenylalaninemia due to a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by >400 mutations in the PAH gene. Recent work has suggested that the majority of PAH missense mutations impair enzyme activity by causing increased protein instability and aggregation. In this study, we describe an alternative mechanism by which some PAH mutations may render PAH defective. Database searches were used to identify regions in the N-terminal domain of PAH with homology to the regulatory domain of prephenate dehydratase (PDH), the rate-limiting enzyme in the bacterial phenylalanine biosynthesis pathway. Naturally occurring N-terminal PAH mutations are distributed in a nonrandom pattern and cluster within residues 46-48 (GAL) and 65-69 (IESRP), two motifs highly conserved in PDH. To examine whether N-terminal PAH mutations affect the ability of PAH to bind phenylalanine at the regulatory domain, wild-type and five mutant (G46S, A47V, T63P/H64N, I65T, and R68S) forms of the N-terminal domain (residues 2-120) of human PAH were expressed as fusion proteins in Escherichia coli. Binding studies showed that the wild-type form of this domain specifically binds phenylalanine, whereas all mutations abolished or significantly reduced this phenylalanine-binding capacity. Our data suggest that impairment of phenylalanine-mediated activation of PAH may be an important disease-causing mechanism of some N-terminal PAH mutations, which may explain some well-documented genotype-phenotype discrepancies in PAH deficiency.",0
"Lysosome-associated protein 1 (LAMP-1) and lysosome-associated protein 2 (LAMP-2) in a larger family carrier of Fabry disease. || Adolescent Adult Aged Biomarkers, Pharmacological Case-Control Studies Enzyme Replacement Therapy Fabry Disease Female Heterozygote Humans Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 2 Lysosome-Associated Membrane Glycoproteins Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Pedigree Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || This study investigated the potential relationship between the expression levels of lysosome-associated membrane proteins (LAMP) 1 and 2 and responses to enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) in the members of a single family with Fabry disease (FD). LAMP levels were assessed by flow cytometry in leukocytes from 17 FD patients who received an eight-month course of ERT course and 101 healthy individuals. We found that phagocytic cells from the FD patients had higher expression levels of both LAMP-1 and LAMP-2, relative to the levels in phagocytes from the healthy controls (p=0.001). Furthermore, the LAMP-1 and LAMP-2 levels in phagocytes from the FD carriers continuously decreased with ERT administration to reach levels similar to those in healthy controls. We suggest that LAMP-1 and LAMP-2 could be used as additional markers with which to assess ERT effectiveness in FD.",0
"Functional analysis of variant lysosomal acid glycosidases of Anderson-Fabry and Pompe disease in a human embryonic kidney epithelial cell line (HEK 293 T). ||  || The functional significance of missense mutations in genes encoding acid glycosidases of lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs) is not always clear. Here we describe a method of investigating functional properties of variant enzymes in vitro using a human embryonic kidney epithelial cell line. Site-directed mutagenesis was performed on the parental plasmids containing cDNA encoding for alpha-galactosidase A (α-Gal A) and acid maltase (α-Glu) to prepare plasmids encoding relevant point mutations. Mutant plasmids were transfected into HEK 293 T cells, and transient over-expression of variant enzymes was measured after 3 days. We have illustrated the method by examining enzymatic activities of four unknown α-Gal A and one α-Glu variants identified in our patients with Anderson-Fabry disease and Pompe diseases respectively. Comparison with control variants known to be either pathogenic or non-pathogenic together with over-expression of wild-type enzyme allowed determination of the pathogenicity of the mutation. One leader sequence novel variant of α-Gal A (p.A15T) was shown not to significantly reduce enzyme activity, whereas three other novel α-Gal A variants (p.D93Y, p.L372P and p.T410I) were shown to be pathogenic as they resulted in significant reduction of enzyme activity. A novel α-Glu variant (p.L72R) was shown to be pathogenic as this significantly reduced enzyme activity. Certain acid glycosidase variants that have been described in association with late-onset LSDs and which are known to have variable residual plasma and leukocyte enzyme activity in patients appear to show intermediate to low enzyme activity (p.N215S and p.Q279E α-Gal A respectively) in the over-expression system.",0
"Infantile-onset Pompe disease: A case series highlighting early clinical features, spectrum of disease severity and treatment response. ||  || Pompe disease is a rare, autosomal, recessive disorder. Alterations in the gene encoding lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase cause impaired glycogen degradation and resultant lysosomal glycogen accumulation. Classic infantile-onset Pompe disease (IPD) manifests soon after birth, severe cases have complete/near complete enzyme deficiency. IPD is associated with a broad spectrum of non-specific clinical features, and diagnostic delays are common. Without treatment, death typically occurs within the first 2 years of life. We present case experiences to help expand paediatricians' understanding of factors contributing to diagnostic delay, clinical decline and to highlight the need for timely therapy. Data were extracted from IPD cases managed at our hospital. Key aspects of clinical presentation, diagnosis, genetic variations, management and overall outcomes were collated then compared with what is already known in the literature. We report four IPD cases (three female). Two patients were cross-reactive immunological material negative. Age at symptom onset was 3-9 months, presenting clinical features were varied, and confirmatory diagnosis was significantly delayed in one patient. In concert with the literature, cardiomegaly, ventricular hypertrophy and delayed developmental milestones were seen in all four cases. Our cases demonstrate a range of disease severity, response to enzyme replacement therapy and antibody development. Significant immune responses were seen in two cases (one cross-reactive immunological material positive); despite immunomodulation therapy, both were associated with fatal outcomes. Timely diagnosis and initiation of enzyme replacement therapy is critical to patient outcomes as IPD progresses rapidly and irreversible changes in clinical status may occur during the delay.",1 0
"E-cadherin mutations and cell motility: a genotype-phenotype correlation. || Animals Blotting, Western CHO Cells Cadherins Cell Movement Cells, Cultured Cricetinae Cricetulus Down-Regulation Fluorescent Antibody Technique Genes, erbB-1 Genotype Mutation, Missense Phenotype Signal Transduction Stomach Neoplasms || E-cadherin has a determinant role in tumour progression, acting as an invasion and metastasis suppressor. Germline mutations of E-cadherin gene (CDH1) occur in 30% of families with Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer (HDGC); of these 23% are missense mutations. The CDH1 missense mutations described to date span the entire gene and some lead to significant functional consequences. In this study, we explored the hypothesis that mutations affecting different E-cadherin protein domains have distinct effects on cell motility. To accomplish our objective we characterized the effect of eleven HDGC CDH1 germline missense mutations (T118R, L214P, G239R, A298T, T340A, P373L, R749W, E757K, E781D, P799R and V832M) on cell motility. Further, we studied their effect on the activation of signalling pathways known to be relevant for cell motility such as the EGFR, Src kinase and MAPKs. CDH1 mutations localized on the extracellular and juxtamembrane domains, both affecting the integrity of the extracellular domain, led to increased cell motility accompanied by increased EGFR activation. Moreover, we observed that cells expressing extracellular mutants exhibit increased activation of Src kinase and p38 MAPK. Our results allowed the identification of the E-cadherin domains pivotal for cell motility, further demonstrated a genotype-phenotype correlation, and defined a subset of HDGC cases which may benefit from EGFR inhibitors.",0
"Functional characterisation of alpha-galactosidase a mutations as a basis for a new classification system in fabry disease. ||  || Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked hereditary defect of glycosphingolipid storage caused by mutations in the gene encoding the lysosomal hydrolase α-galactosidase A (GLA, α-gal A). To date, over 400 mutations causing amino acid substitutions have been described. Most of these mutations are related to the classical Fabry phenotype. Generally in lysosomal storage disorders a reliable genotype/phenotype correlation is difficult to achieve, especially in FD with its X-linked mode of inheritance. In order to predict the metabolic consequence of a given mutation, we combined in vitro enzyme activity with in vivo biomarker data. Furthermore, we used the pharmacological chaperone (PC) 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin (DGJ) as a tool to analyse the influence of individual mutations on subcellular organelle-trafficking and stability. We analysed a significant number of mutations and correlated the obtained properties to the clinical manifestation related to the mutation in order to improve our knowledge of the identity of functional relevant amino acids. Additionally, we illustrate the consequences of different mutations on plasma lyso-globotriaosylsphingosine (lyso-Gb3) accumulation in the patients' plasma, a biomarker proven to reflect the impaired substrate clearance caused by specific mutations. The established system enables us to provide information for the clinical relevance of PC therapy for a given mutant. Finally, in order to generate reliable predictions of mutant GLA defects we compared the different data sets to reveal the most coherent system to reflect the clinical situation.",3 4 0
"A prevalent missense mutation in Northern Europe associated with hyperphenylalaninaemia. || Alleles Chromosomes, Human, Pair 3 Chromosomes, Human, Pair 4 Denmark Europe European Continental Ancestry Group Humans Mutation Phenylketonurias || A missense mutation has been identified in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene of a Danish patient with hyperphenylalaninaemia (HPA). An A-to-G transition at the second base of codon 414 results in the substitution of Cys for Tyr in the mutant PAH protein. In in vitro expression studies, the Tyr414-to-Cys414 mutant construct produced a protein which exhibited a significant amount of normal PAH enzyme activity, which is consistent with both in vitro and in vivo measurements of PAH activity in HPA patients. Population genetic studies reveal that this mutation is present on 50% of mutant haplotype 4 chromosomes in the Danish population. Together with the previously reported codon 158 mutation, these two mutant alleles comprise over 90% of all mutant haplotype 4 chromosomes in the Northern European population. Thus, two allele-specific oligonucleotide probes can detect most mutant haplotype 4 chromosomes in Northern Europe.",0
"E-cadherin gene mutations in human gastric carcinoma cell lines. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Cadherins Cloning, Molecular DNA Mutational Analysis DNA Primers DNA, Complementary DNA, Neoplasm Exons Humans Introns Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction RNA, Messenger RNA, Neoplasm Stomach Neoplasms Tumor Cells, Cultured || Reduced expression of E-cadherin has been regarded as one of the main molecular events involved in dysfunction of the cell-cell adhesion system, triggering cancer invasion and metastasis. However, even with a sufficient amount of E-cadherin, cell-cell adhesion is sometimes lost in ""diffusely invasive"" human carcinomas. Ten human cancer cell lines, showing growth characterized morphologically by loose cell-cell adhesion, were analyzed for possible structural abnormalities of their expressed E-cadherin. Four of the cell lines showed strong mRNA and protein expression with no nucleotide sequence abnormalities, and mRNA was absent in four other cell lines. mRNA sequence was abnormal in the remaining two gastric carcinoma cell lines. In MKN45 (poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma), this involved a 12-bp in-frame deletion with strong expression of mRNA and protein. In KATO-III (signet ring cell carcinoma), there were four mRNA species with insertions of different sizes, among which the major transcripts (with a 7-bp insertion) caused a frameshift, and expression of both mRNA and protein was markedly reduced. In these two cell lines, DNA mutations were detected around exon-intron junctions, revealing that aberrant RNA splicing was the cause of the mRNA abnormalities. In addition, the wild-type allele of the E-cadherin locus was lost, suggesting that the E-cadherin gene had been inactivated by two hits (mutation and allele loss), similar to the mechanism for inactivation of tumor suppressor genes.",0
"Mutation of an A-kinase-anchoring protein causes long-QT syndrome. || A Kinase Anchor Proteins Adolescent Adult Aged Binding Sites Child Child, Preschool Cytoskeletal Proteins DNA Mutational Analysis Female Humans Infant KCNQ1 Potassium Channel Long QT Syndrome Male Middle Aged Mutation Potassium Channels Protein Structure, Tertiary Receptors, Adrenergic, beta || A-kinase anchoring proteins (AKAPs) recruit signaling molecules and present them to downstream targets to achieve efficient spatial and temporal control of their phosphorylation state. In the heart, sympathetic nervous system (SNS) regulation of cardiac action potential duration (APD), mediated by beta-adrenergic receptor (betaAR) activation, requires assembly of AKAP9 (Yotiao) with the I(Ks) potassium channel alpha subunit (KCNQ1). KCNQ1 mutations that disrupt this complex cause type 1 long-QT syndrome (LQT1), one of the potentially lethal heritable arrhythmia syndromes. Here, we report identification of (i) regions on Yotiao critical to its binding to KCNQ1 and (ii) a single putative LQTS-causing mutation (S1570L) in AKAP9 (Yotiao) localized to the KCNQ1 binding domain in 1/50 (2%) subjects with a clinically robust phenotype for LQTS but absent in 1,320 reference alleles. The inherited S1570L mutation reduces the interaction between KCNQ1 and Yotiao, reduces the cAMP-induced phosphorylation of the channel, eliminates the functional response of the I(Ks) channel to cAMP, and prolongs the action potential in a computational model of the ventricular cardiocyte. These reconstituted cellular consequences of the inherited S1570L-Yotiao mutation are consistent with delayed repolarization of the ventricular action potential observed in the affected siblings. Thus, we have demonstrated a link between genetic perturbations in AKAP and human disease in general and AKAP9 and LQTS in particular.",2 0
"Identification of a missense mutation in one allele of a patient with Pompe disease, and use of endonuclease digestion of PCR-amplified RNA to demonstrate lack of mRNA expression from the second allele. || Base Sequence Blotting, Southern Cell Line Cloning, Molecular Endonucleases European Continental Ancestry Group Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Methionine Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Protein Conformation Threonine alpha-Glucosidases || Infantile-onset glycogen storage disease type II, or Pompe disease, results from a genetic deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme acid alpha glucosidase (GAA). Sequencing of the cDNA from a cell line (GM 244) derived from a patient with Pompe disease demonstrated a T953-to-C transition that predicted a methionine-to-threonine substitution at codon 318. The basepair substitution resulted in loss of restriction-endonuclease sites for NcoI and StyI. Analysis of genomic DNA revealed both a normal and an abnormal NcoI fragment, indicating that the patient was a genetic compound. NcoI and StyI digestion of cDNA, amplified by PCR from reverse-transcribed RNA, demonstrated that greater than 95% of the GAA mRNA in GM 244 was derived from the allele carrying the missense mutation. The missense mutation was uncommon, since it was not detected in 37 additional GAA-deficient chromosomes, as determined by digestion of genomic DNA with NcoI and hybridization. The amino acid substitution predicts a new potential site for N-linked glycosylation, as well as major changes in secondary structure of the protein. We could confirm that the mutation was responsible for the enzyme deficiency by demonstrating that a hybrid minigene containing the mutation did not express GAA enzyme activity after transient gene expression. We have therefore now provided the first identification of a single-basepair missense mutation in a patient with Pompe disease and furthermore have demonstrated that the patient is a genetic compound with the second allele barely expressing mRNA.",1 0
"Molecular genetics of the LDL receptor gene in familial hypercholesterolemia. ||  || The low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor is a cell surface transmembrane protein that mediates the uptake and lysosomal degradation of plasma LDL, thereby providing cholesterol to cells. Mutations disrupting the function of this receptor produce autosomal dominant familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). Affected individuals have elevated plasma levels of LDL, which causes premature coronary atherosclerosis. To date, 71 mutations in the LDL receptor gene have been characterized at a molecular level. In this report, we describe 79 additional mutations and review the insights that all 150 mutations have provided into the structure/function relationship of the receptor protein and the clinical manifestations of FH.",3 4 0
"Next-generation sequencing identifies rare variants associated with Noonan syndrome. || Alleles Genetic Association Studies High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans MAP Kinase Kinase 1 MAP Kinase Signaling System Mutation Neurofibromin 1 Noonan Syndrome ras Proteins || Noonan syndrome (NS) is a relatively common genetic disorder, characterized by typical facies, short stature, developmental delay, and cardiac abnormalities. Known causative genes account for 70-80% of clinically diagnosed NS patients, but the genetic basis for the remaining 20-30% of cases is unknown. We performed next-generation sequencing on germ-line DNA from 27 NS patients lacking a mutation in the known NS genes. We identified gain-of-function alleles in Ras-like without CAAX 1 (RIT1) and mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1 (MAP2K1) and previously unseen loss-of-function variants in RAS p21 protein activator 2 (RASA2) that are likely to cause NS in these patients. Expression of the mutant RASA2, MAP2K1, or RIT1 alleles in heterologous cells increased RAS-ERK pathway activation, supporting a causative role in NS pathogenesis. Two patients had more than one disease-associated variant. Moreover, the diagnosis of an individual initially thought to have NS was revised to neurofibromatosis type 1 based on an NF1 nonsense mutation detected in this patient. Another patient harbored a missense mutation in NF1 that resulted in decreased protein stability and impaired ability to suppress RAS-ERK activation; however, this patient continues to exhibit a NS-like phenotype. In addition, a nonsense mutation in RPS6KA3 was found in one patient initially diagnosed with NS whose diagnosis was later revised to Coffin-Lowry syndrome. Finally, we identified other potential candidates for new NS genes, as well as potential carrier alleles for unrelated syndromes. Taken together, our data suggest that next-generation sequencing can provide a useful adjunct to RASopathy diagnosis and emphasize that the standard clinical categories for RASopathies might not be adequate to describe all patients.",0
"Differential regulation of PTEN expression by androgen receptor in prostate and breast cancers. || Base Sequence Breast Neoplasms Carcinoma Cell Line, Tumor Female Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data PTEN Phosphohydrolase Point Mutation Promoter Regions, Genetic Prostatic Neoplasms Receptors, Androgen Sex Factors || Prostate cancer and breast cancer are the most common malignancies in the western world. Androgen receptor (AR) and PTEN both have been well documented to have important roles in prostate carcinogenesis. In contrast, AR and PTEN in breast carcinogenesis have not been well studied. Furthermore, the crosstalk and connection between those two pathways remain unclear. Increased AR expression in prostate cancers, combined with decreased PTEN expression, portends a poor clinical outcome. Paradoxically, both high AR and high PTEN levels, detected by immunohistochemistry, in primary breast carcinomas have been associated with better disease-free survival. Here, we performed in silico analysis of publicly available microarray data sets from prostate or breast carcinomas. We found an inverse correlation between AR and PTEN transcript expression in prostate cancer tissues in contrast to the positive correlation in breast cancer. These data led us to hypothesize that AR may directly affect PTEN transcriptional regulation in prostate and breast cancer cells. Here, we show for the first time that AR inhibits PTEN transcription in prostate cancer cells, whereas AR upregulates PTEN transcription in breast cancer cells, which mechanistically explains both the immunohistochemical PTEN-AR expressional data noted in clinical trials and in our in silico analysis of the transcriptomes of breast and prostate cancers. In addition, we have fine-mapped the AR-binding motif within the PTEN promoter. Here we show that, in patients with Cowden syndrome, an inherited cancer syndrome caused by germline mutations scattered throughout PTEN, point variants affecting the 3' end of the AR-binding motif result in abrogation of androgen-mediated transcriptional regulation of PTEN expression. We may speculate that the differential AR effect on PTEN may begin to explain organ-specific and perhaps sex-specific neoplasia predisposition in Cowden syndrome, as well as why only a fraction of women with germline PTEN mutations develop breast cancer, depending on the androgen steroid milieu and levels.",4 0
"In vitro expression of 34 naturally occurring mutant variants of phenylalanine hydroxylase: correlation with metabolic phenotypes and susceptibility toward protein aggregation. || Animals Catalytic Domain Cell-Free System Denmark Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel Escherichia coli Genotype Humans Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation Mutation, Missense Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Plasmids Protein Binding Protein Biosynthesis Protein Structure, Tertiary Rabbits Reticulocytes Transcription, Genetic || Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) is a homotetrameric enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine, the rate-limiting step of phenylalanine disposal in humans. Primary dysfunction of PAH caused by mutations in the PAH gene results in hyperphenylalaninemia, which may impair cognitive development unless corrected by dietary restriction of phenylalanine. The mechanism(s) by which PAH missense mutations cause enzyme impairment has been studied in detail only in a small number of cases, but existing evidence points to a major role of enhanced proteolytic degradation due to aberrant folding of mutant polypeptides. We have used two heterologous in vitro expression systems (a mammalian cell-free transcription-translation system and the pET system of Escherichia coli) to examine 34 mutations that have been associated with PAH deficiency in the Danish population. These mutations represent a broad range of amino acid substitutions, functional enzyme domains, and metabolic phenotypes. In both systems, residual in vitro activities correlated broadly with metabolic phenotypes, however, with significant discrepancies. Analysis of E. coli extracts by nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and storage experiments showed that (i) in general, mutations in the N-terminal regulatory domain are associated with relatively stable proteins compared to most mutations in the central catalytic domain, and (ii) for mutations in the catalytic domain, high levels of protein aggregation do not always correspond with a severe phenotype. Our data support and extend previous evidence that PAH mutations exert their pathogenic effects by several distinct mechanisms that may operate individually or in concert.",0
"A novel germline mutation of PTEN associated with brain tumours of multiple lineages. || Adult Amino Acid Substitution Apoptosis Brain Neoplasms Cell Division Cell Lineage DNA Mutational Analysis DNA, Neoplasm Enzyme Activation Frontal Lobe Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Insulin Loss of Heterozygosity Male Meningeal Neoplasms Meningioma Models, Molecular Mutation, Missense Neoplasm Proteins Neoplasms, Multiple Primary Oligodendroglioma PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Point Mutation Protein Conformation Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Proto-Oncogene Proteins Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt Transfection Tumor Suppressor Proteins U937 Cells || We have identified a novel germline mutation in the PTEN tumour suppressor gene. The mutation was identified in a patient with a glioma, and turned out to be a heterozygous germline mutation of PTEN (Arg234Gln), without loss of heterozygosity in tumour DNA. The biological consequences of this germline mutation were investigated by means of transfection studies of the mutant PTEN molecule compared to wild-type PTEN. In contrast to the wild-type molecule, the mutant PTEN protein is not capable of inducing apoptosis, induces increased cell proliferation and leads to high constitutive PKB/Akt activation, which cannot be increased anymore by stimulation with insulin. The reported patient, in addition to glioma, had suffered from benign meningioma in the past but did not show any clinical signs of Cowden disease or other hereditary diseases typically associated with PTEN germline mutations. The functional consequences of the mutation in transfection studies are consistent with high proliferative activity. Together, these findings suggest that the Arg234Gln missense mutation in PTEN has oncogenic properties and predisposes to brain tumours of multiple lineages.",3 0
"Diverse driving forces underlie the invariant occurrence of the T42A, E139D, I282V and T468M SHP2 amino acid substitutions causing Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes. || Amino Acid Substitution Computer Simulation DNA Mutational Analysis HeLa Cells Humans LEOPARD Syndrome Models, Molecular Mutation, Missense Noonan Syndrome Protein Structure, Quaternary Protein Structure, Tertiary Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 || Missense PTPN11 mutations cause Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes (NS and LS), two developmental disorders with pleiomorphic phenotypes. PTPN11 encodes SHP2, an SH2 domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase functioning as a signal transducer. Generally, different substitutions of a particular amino acid residue are observed in these diseases, indicating that the crucial factor is the residue being replaced. For a few codons, only one substitution is observed, suggesting the possibility of specific roles for the residue introduced. We analyzed the biochemical behavior and ligand-binding properties of all possible substitutions arising from single-base changes affecting codons 42, 139, 279, 282 and 468 to investigate the mechanisms underlying the invariant occurrence of the T42A, E139D and I282V substitutions in NS and the Y279C and T468M changes in LS. Our data demonstrate that the isoleucine-to-valine change at codon 282 is the only substitution at that position perturbing the stability of SHP2's closed conformation without impairing catalysis, while the threonine-to-alanine change at codon 42, but not other substitutions of that residue, promotes increased phosphopeptide-binding affinity. The recognition specificity of the C-SH2 domain bearing the E139D substitution differed substantially from its wild-type counterpart acquiring binding properties similar to those observed for the N-SH2 domain, revealing a novel mechanism of SHP2's functional dysregulation. Finally, while functional selection does not seem to occur for the substitutions at codons 279 and 468, we point to deamination of the methylated cytosine at nucleotide 1403 as the driving factor leading to the high prevalence of the T468M change in LS.",0
"Complex functions of mutant p53 alleles from human prostate cancer. ||  || Few studies have used multiple assays to examine the functionality of mutant p53 in prostate cancer (CaP). We employed seven functional assays to study 16 representative mutant p53 alleles, six from localized and ten from metastatic CaP. Yeast assays were employed to determine loss of function (LOF), partial function (PF), and dominant-negative status. Assays using p53-null Saos2 cells were used to determine whether mammalian cells transfected with mutant p53 could up-regulate the MDR-1 or PCNA promoters, alter IL-6 expression or confer the ability to grow in soft agar. As a further test of gain of function (GOF), p53-null PC3 cells stably transfected with these mutant p53 alleles were examined for cell cycle distributions. All 16 mutant p53 alleles demonstrated either total or partial LOF. All but one allele also had at least one gain of function; however, the pattern of GOF was different for each mutant allele. Alleles derived from both localized and metastatic CaP had similar GOF characteristics; however, only alleles from metastatic disease had significantly increased S-phase fractions. Different mutant p53 alleles from CaP had different, complex functional profiles. The lack of predictable patterns for these alleles suggest that each mutation may uniquely affect p53 function.",0
"Targeted Screening of Fabry Disease in Male Hemodialysis Patients in Brazil Highlights Importance of Family Screening. ||  || Fabry disease (FD) is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by enzyme α galactosidase A (α-Gal A) deficiency due to mutations in the galactosidase alpha (GLA) gene. It leads to damage several organs, such as the kidneys, due to progressive accumulation of glycosphingolipids. To estimate the prevalence of FD among male hemodialysis (HD) patients in a northern state of Brazil. Screening was performed using a dried blood spot on filter paper to identify patients with low α-Gal A enzyme activity (≤2.2 µmol/l/h). Those with low enzyme activity underwent genetic analysis of the GLA gene. Family screening was conducted in the index cases. 2,583 male HD patients (age: 52 (18-91 years)) were screened. The α-Gal A assay identified 72 males (2.78%) with low enzyme activity. Genotyping identified 3 patients with GLA mutations: W204X, A368T, both previously reported; and C52F, a novel missense mutation. Only the patient with W204X mutation had classic FD. The prevalence rate was 0.12%. Family screening of the index cases identified 23 family members with the same mutations. The prevalence of FD amongst male HD patients found in the Northern of Brazil was low (0.12%). However, family screening of the 3 index cases identified family members at an early stage of the disease, which may benefit from earlier treatment.",2 4 0
"Mechanistic and structural analysis of a family 31 alpha-glycosidase and its glycosyl-enzyme intermediate. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Binding Sites Biopolymers Cloning, Molecular DNA Primers Escherichia coli Glycoside Hydrolase Inhibitors Kinetics Lysosomes Models, Molecular Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, Biomolecular Protein Conformation Sequence Homology, Amino Acid alpha-Glucosidases || We have determined the first structure of a family 31 alpha-glycosidase, that of YicI from Escherichia coli, both free and trapped as a 5-fluoroxylopyranosyl-enzyme intermediate via reaction with 5-fluoro-alpha-D-xylopyranosyl fluoride. Our 2.2-A resolution structure shows an intimately associated hexamer with structural elements from several monomers converging at each of the six active sites. Our kinetic and mass spectrometry analyses verified several of the features observed in our structural data, including a covalent linkage from the carboxylate side chain of the identified nucleophile Asp(416) to C-1 of the sugar ring. Structure-based sequence comparison of YicI with the mammalian alpha-glucosidases lysosomal alpha-glucosidase and sucrase-isomaltase predicts a high level of structural similarity and provides a foundation for understanding the various mutations of these enzymes that elicit human disease.",0
"Identification and characterization of LDL receptor gene mutations in hyperlipidemic Chinese. || Animals Asian Continental Ancestry Group Base Sequence COS Cells DNA, Complementary Endosomes Exons Golgi Apparatus Haplotypes Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Lysosomes Molecular Sequence Data Pedigree Point Mutation Polymorphism, Genetic Receptors, LDL Transfection || DNA screening for LDL receptor mutations was performed in 170 unrelated hyperlipidemic Chinese patients and two clinically diagnosed familial hypercholesterolemia patients. Two deletions (Del e3-5 and Del e6-8), eight point mutations (W-18X, D69N, R94H, E207K, C308Y, I402T, A410T, and A696G), and two polymorphisms (A370T and I602V) were identified. Of these mutations, C308Y and Del e6-8 were found in homozygosity, and D69N and C308Y were seen in unrelated patients. The effects of mutations on LDL receptor function were characterized in COS-7 cells. The LDL receptor level and activity were close to those of wild type in A696G transfected cells. A novel intermediate protein and reduction of LDL receptor activity were seen in D69N transfected cells. For R94H, E207K, C308Y, I402T, and A410T mutations, only approximately 20-64% of normal receptor activities were seen. Conversely, Del e3-5 and Del e6-8 lead to defective proteins with approximately 0-13% activity. Most of the mutant receptors were localized intracellularly, with a staining pattern resembling that of the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus (D69N, R94H, E207K, C308Y, and I402T) or endosome/lysosome (A410T and Del e6-8). Molecular analysis of the LDL receptor gene will clearly identify the cause of the patient's hyperlipidemia and allow appropriate early treatment as well as antenatal and family studies.",4 0
"E-cadherin genetic screening and clinico-pathologic characteristics of early onset gastric cancer. || Adult Antigens, CD Cadherins Cell Adhesion DNA Methylation Early Detection of Cancer Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Humans Loss of Heterozygosity Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Neoplasm Invasiveness Stomach Neoplasms || CDH1 germline alterations occur in about 40% of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) families. CDH1 germline mutations are also documented in few early onset diffuse gastric cancer patients (EODGC) without family history, but the real frequency in this setting in unknown. In these patients, the advanced stage at the time of diagnosis remains a clinical burden due to the poor long term survival. The entire coding region and exon flanking sequences of the CDH1 gene was analysed by direct sequencing in 21 EODGC patients aged ≤50 years. The potential deleterious nature for a new CDH1 missense variant was assessed by cell-cell aggregation and invasion assays. Somatic CDH1 mutation, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and promoter hypermethylation was explored in the tumour from one CDH1 germline mutation carrier. Two novel CDH1 germline variants were identified in 21 EODGC cases, c.670C>T and -63C>A. Functional analysis of the c.670C>T missense variant classified this mutation as non-pathogenic. The analysis of CDH1 somatic second hits failed to demonstrate E-cadherin structural and epigenetic alterations in the tumour sample. Data from the present work and a systematic review of the literature revealed that CDH1 germline mutations occurred in 7.2% of EOGC patients invariably with diffuse of mixed histology. From these, proved CDH1 mutation pathogenicity has been assigned only to 2.3% of the cases who were recurrently diagnosed before 35 years old. Germline CDH1 mutation remain the only germline genetic defect described in this type of patients and CDH1 mutation screening should be recommended for patients with these characteristics.",3 0
"Mutation analysis in Costello syndrome: functional and structural characterization of the HRAS p.Lys117Arg mutation. ||  || Costello syndrome is a mental retardation syndrome characterized by high birth weight, postnatal growth retardation, coarse face, loose skin, cardiovascular problems, and tumor predisposition. De novo heterozygous missense mutations in HRAS codon 12 and 13 disturbing the intrinsic GTP hydrolysis cause Costello syndrome. We report a patient with typical Costello syndrome and a novel heterozygous missense mutation in codon 117 (c.350A>G, p.Lys117Arg) of the HRAS gene, resulting in constitutive activation of the RAS/MAPK pathway similar to the typical p.Gly12Ser and p.Gly12Ala mutations. Recombinant HRAS p.Lys117Arg demonstrates normal intrinsic GTP hydrolysis and responsiveness to GTPase-activating proteins, but the nucleotide dissociation rate is increased 80-fold. Consistent with the biochemical data, the crystal structure of the p.Lys117Arg mutant indicates an altered interaction pattern of the side chain that is associated with unfavorable nucleotide binding properties. Together, these data show that a RAS mutation that only perturbs guanine nucleotide binding has similar functional consequences as mutations that impair GTP hydrolysis and causes human disease.",0
"Breast cancer-associated missense mutants of the PALB2 WD40 domain, which directly binds RAD51C, RAD51 and BRCA2, disrupt DNA repair. || BRCA2 Protein Breast Neoplasms DNA Breaks, Double-Stranded DNA Repair DNA-Binding Proteins Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group N Protein Female HEK293 Cells HeLa Cells Humans Mutation, Missense Nuclear Proteins Protein Binding Protein Interaction Domains and Motifs Protein Interaction Maps Rad51 Recombinase Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Heterozygous carriers of germ-line mutations in the BRCA2/FANCD1, PALB2/FANCN and RAD51C/FANCO DNA repair genes have an increased lifetime risk of developing breast, ovarian and other cancers; bi-allelic mutations in these genes clinically manifest as Fanconi anemia (FA). Here, we demonstrate that RAD51C is part of a novel protein complex that contains PALB2 and BRCA2. Further, the PALB2 WD40 domain can directly and independently bind RAD51C and BRCA2. To understand the role of these homologous recombination (HR) proteins in DNA repair, we functionally characterize effects of missense mutants of the PALB2 WD40 domain that have been reported in breast cancer patients. In contrast to large truncations of PALB2, which display a complete loss of interaction, the L939W, T1030I and L1143P missense mutants/variants of the PALB2 WD40 domain are associated with altered patterns of direct binding to the RAD51C, RAD51 and BRCA2 HR proteins in biochemical assays. Further, the T1030I missense mutant is unstable, whereas the L939W and L1143P proteins are stable but partially disrupt the PALB2-RAD51C-BRCA2 complex in cells. Functionally, the L939W and L1143P mutants display a decreased capacity for DNA double-strand break-induced HR and an increased cellular sensitivity to ionizing radiation. As further evidence for the functional importance of the HR complex, RAD51C mutants that are associated with cancer susceptibility and FA also display decreased complex formation with PALB2. Together, our results suggest that three different cancer susceptibility and FA proteins function in a DNA repair pathway based upon the PALB2 WD40 domain binding to RAD51C and BRCA2.",0
"Functional analysis of PTPN11/SHP-2 mutants identified in Noonan syndrome and childhood leukemia. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Female Humans Infant Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Leukemia, Myeloid Male Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases Mutation Noonan Syndrome Phenotype Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases SH2 Domain-Containing Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases src Homology Domains || Noonan syndrome (NS) is characterized by short stature, characteristic facial features, and heart defects. Recently, missense mutations of PTPN11, the gene encoding protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) SHP-2, were identified in patients with NS. Further, somatic mutations in PTPN11 were detected in childhood leukemia. Recent studies showed that the phosphatase activities of five mutations identified in NS and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) were increased. However, the functional properties of the other mutations remain unidentified. In this study, in order to clarify the differences between the mutations identified in NS and leukemia, we examined the phosphatase activity of 14 mutants of SHP-2. We identified nine mutations, including a novel F71I mutation, in 16 of 41 NS patients and two mutations, including a novel G503V mutation, in three of 29 patients with leukemia. Immune complex phosphatase assays of individual mutants transfected in COS7 cells showed that ten mutants identified in NS and four mutants in leukemia showed 1.4-fold to 12.7-fold increased activation compared with wild-type SHP-2. These results suggest that the pathogenesis of NS and leukemia is associated with enhanced phosphatase activity of mutant SHP-2. A comparison of the phosphatase activity in each mutant and a review of previously reported cases showed that high phosphatase activity observed in mutations at codons 61, 71, 72, and 76 was significantly associated with leukemogenesis.",4 0
"Impacts of Usher syndrome type IB mutations on human myosin VIIa motor function. || Actomyosin Adenosine Diphosphate Adenosine Triphosphate Dyneins Enzyme Activation Humans Mutation, Missense Myosins Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome (USH) is a human hereditary disorder characterized by profound congenital deafness, retinitis pigmentosa, and vestibular dysfunction. Myosin VIIa has been identified as the responsible gene for USH type 1B, and a number of missense mutations have been identified in the affected families. However, the molecular basis of the dysfunction of USH gene, myosin VIIa, in the affected families is unknown to date. Here we clarified the effects of USH1B mutations on human myosin VIIa motor function for the first time. The missense mutations of USH1B significantly inhibited the actin activation of ATPase activity of myosin VIIa. G25R, R212C, A397D, and E450Q mutations abolished the actin-activated ATPase activity completely. P503L mutation increased the basal ATPase activity for 2-3-fold but reduced the actin-activated ATPase activity to 50% of the wild type. While all of the mutations examined, except for R302H, reduced the affinity for actin and the ATP hydrolysis cycling rate, they did not largely decrease the rate of ADP release from actomyosin, suggesting that the mutations reduce the duty ratio of myosin VIIa. Taken together, the results suggest that the mutations responsible for USH1B cause the complete loss of the actin-activated ATPase activity or the reduction of duty ratio of myosin VIIa.",0
"Novel mutations in the long isoform of the USH2A gene in patients with Usher syndrome type II or non-syndromic retinitis pigmentosa. || Cohort Studies Computational Biology Extracellular Matrix Proteins Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Mutation Mutation, Missense Protein Isoforms Retinitis Pigmentosa Sequence Analysis, DNA Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome type II (USH2) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterised by retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and mild to moderate sensorineural hearing loss. Mutations in the USH2A gene are the most common cause of USH2 and are also a cause of some forms of RP without hearing loss (ie, non-syndromic RP). The USH2A gene was initially identified as a transcript comprised of 21 exons but subsequently a longer isoform containing 72 exons was identified. The 51 exons unique to the long isoform of USH2A were screened for mutations among a core set of 108 patients diagnosed with USH2 and 80 patients with non-syndromic RP who were all included in a previously reported screen of the short isoform of USH2A. For several exons, additional patients were screened. In total, 35 deleterious mutations were identified including 17 nonsense mutations, 9 frameshift mutations, 5 splice-site mutations, and 4 small in-frame deletions or insertions. Twenty-seven mutations were novel. In addition, 65 rare missense changes were identified. A method of classifying the deleterious effect of the missense changes was developed using the summed results of four different mutation assessment algorithms, SIFT, pMUT, PolyPhen, and AGVGD. This system classified 8 of the 65 changes as 'likely deleterious' and 9 as 'possibly deleterious'. At least one mutation was identified in 57-63% of USH2 cases and 19-23% of cases of non-syndromic recessive RP (calculated without and including probable/possible deleterious changes) thus supporting that USH2A is the most common known cause of RP in the USA.",1 0
"Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome with posterior subcapsular congenital cataract and a consensus sequence splicing PTEN mutation. || Base Sequence Cataract Child Consensus Sequence Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase RNA Splicing || ",3 0
"Seven cases of Pompe disease from Greece. ||  || We present seven cases of Pompe disease (McKusick 232300; glycogen storage disease type II; acid maltase deficiency) from Greece. The onset of symptoms varied from early childhood to late adulthood, and the patients had quite variable duration of disease. All but one of them had muscle weakness and all had mildly to highly elevated serum creatine kinase. The diagnosis in all cases was confirmed by the finding of acid alpha-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.3/20) deficiency in cultured skin fibroblasts. Thirteen mutant alleles were identified and nine different pathogenic mutations were encountered. Four were new: c.2071_2072insAGCCG leads to frameshift and total loss of function; c.1856G > A (p.Ser619Asn) leads to 90-95% loss of function; and the splice-site mutations c.1552-3C > G and c.2331+4A > G reduce the number of correct splicing events by more than 90%. The splice-site mutation c.-32-13T > G (IVS1-13T > G) was encountered four times and seems equally common among Greek and other caucasians. The other mutations: c.925G > A (p.Gly309Arg), c.[307T > G; 271G > A] (p.Cys103Gly; Asp91Asn), c.271del and c.1655T > C (p.Leu552Pro) have been reported earlier. Our study highlights the heterogeneity of Pompe disease in Greece and provides tools for diagnosis and carrier detection.",3 1 0
"Homomeric and heteromeric assembly of KCNQ (Kv7) K+ channels assayed by total internal reflection fluorescence/fluorescence resonance energy transfer and patch clamp analysis. || Animals CHO Cells Cricetinae Cricetulus Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer Gene Expression Humans KCNQ Potassium Channels Mutation Patch-Clamp Techniques Protein Structure, Quaternary Rats || M-type K(+) channels, consisting of KCNQ1-5 (Kv7.1-7.5) subunits, form a variety of homomeric and heteromeric channels. Whereas all the subunits can assemble into homomeric channels, the ability of the subunits to assemble into heteromultimers is highly variable. KCNQ3 is widely thought to co-assemble with several other KCNQ subtypes, whereas KCNQ1 and KCNQ2 do not. However, the existence of other subunit assemblies is not well studied. To systematically explore the heteromeric assembly of KCNQ channels in individual living cells, we performed fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) between cyan fluorescent protein- and yellow fluorescent protein-tagged KCNQ subunits expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells under total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy in which excitation light only penetrates several hundred nanometers into the cell, thus isolating membrane events. We found significant FRET between homomeric subunits as expected from their functional expression in heterologous expression systems. Also as expected from previous work, robust FRET was observed between KCNQ2 and KCNQ3. KCNQ3 and KCNQ4 also showed substantial FRET as did KCNQ4 and KCNQ5. To determine functional assembly of KCNQ4/KCNQ5 heteromers, we performed two types of experiments. In the first, we constructed a mutant tetraethylammonium ion-sensitive KCNQ4 subunit and tested its assembly with KCNQ5 by patch clamp analysis of the tetraethylammonium ion sensitivity of the resulting current; however, those data were not conclusive. In the second, we co-expressed a KCNQ4 (G285S) pore mutant with KCNQ5 and found the former to act as a dominant negative, suggesting co-assembly of the two types of subunits. These data confirm that among the allowed assembly conformations are KCNQ3/4 and KCNQ4/5 heteromers.",0
"Cell biology assessment of glucokinase mutations V62M and G72R in pancreatic beta-cells: evidence for cellular instability of catalytic activity. || Animals Catalysis Cell Line Chimera Glucokinase Humans Insulin-Secreting Cells Male Mice Mice, Inbred C57BL Mutation || Mutations in the glucokinase (GK) gene cause defects in blood glucose homeostasis. In some cases (V62M and G72R), the phenotype cannot be explained by altered enzyme kinetics or protein instability. We used transient and stable expression of green fluorescent protein (GFP) GK chimaeras in MIN6 beta-cells to study the phenotype defect of V62M and G72R. GK activity in lysates of MIN6 cell lines stably expressing wild-type or mutant GFP GK showed the expected affinity for glucose and response to pharmacological activators, indicating the expression of catalytically active enzymes. MIN6 cells stably expressing GFP V62M or GFP G72R had a lower GK activity-to-GK immunoreactivity ratio and GK activity-to-GK mRNA ratio but not GK immunoreactivity-to-GK mRNA ratio than wild-type GFP GK. Heterologous expression of liver 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase (PFK2/FDP2) in cell lines increased GK activity for wild-type GK and V62M but not for G72R, whereas expression of liver GK regulatory protein (GKRP) increased GK activity for wild type but not V62M or G72R. Lack of interaction of these mutants with GKRP was also evident in hepatocyte transfections from the lack of nuclear accumulation. These results suggest that cellular loss of GK catalytic activity rather than impaired translation or enhanced protein degradation may account for the hyperglycemia in subjects with V62M and G72R mutations.",0
"A homozygous missense mutation in the ciliary gene TTC21B causes familial FSGS. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adolescent Adult Animals Cell Line, Transformed Child Cilia Family Health Female Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental Haplotypes Homozygote Humans Male Mice Microtubule-Associated Proteins Mutation, Missense Pedigree Phenotype Podocytes Stress Fibers Young Adult || Several genes, mainly involved in podocyte cytoskeleton regulation, have been implicated in familial forms of primary FSGS. We identified a homozygous missense mutation (p.P209L) in the TTC21B gene in seven families with FSGS. Mutations in this ciliary gene were previously reported to cause nephronophthisis, a chronic tubulointerstitial nephropathy. Notably, tubular basement membrane thickening reminiscent of that observed in nephronophthisis was present in patients with FSGS and the p.P209L mutation. We demonstrated that the TTC21B gene product IFT139, an intraflagellar transport-A component, mainly localizes at the base of the primary cilium in developing podocytes from human fetal tissue and in undifferentiated cultured podocytes. In contrast, in nonciliated adult podocytes and differentiated cultured cells, IFT139 relocalized along the extended microtubule network. We further showed that knockdown of IFT139 in podocytes leads to primary cilia defects, abnormal cell migration, and cytoskeleton alterations, which can be partially rescued by p.P209L overexpression, indicating its hypomorphic effect. Our results demonstrate the involvement of a ciliary gene in a glomerular disorder and point to a critical function of IFT139 in podocytes. Altogether, these data suggest that this homozygous TTC21B p.P209L mutation leads to a novel hereditary kidney disorder with both glomerular and tubulointerstitial damages.",2 0
"B-Cell depletion and immunomodulation before initiation of enzyme replacement therapy blocks the immune response to acid alpha-glucosidase in infantile-onset Pompe disease. || Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived Antigens, CD Autoantibodies B-Lymphocytes Biomarkers Drug Administration Schedule Drug Therapy, Combination Enzyme Replacement Therapy Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay Female Flow Cytometry Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunoglobulin G Immunoglobulins, Intravenous Immunosuppressive Agents Infant Male Mycophenolic Acid Rituximab Sirolimus Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || To evaluate whether B-cell depletion before enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) initiation can block acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) antibody responses and improve clinical outcomes. Six subjects with Pompe disease (including 4 cross-reacting immunologic material-negative infants) aged 2-8 months received rituximab and sirolimus or mycophenolate before ERT. Four subjects continued to receive sirolimus, rituximab every 12 weeks, and intravenous immunoglobulin monthly for the duration of ERT. Sirolimus trough levels, IgG, CD3, CD4, CD8, CD19, CD20, N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide, creatine kinase, creatine kinase-MB, C-reactive protein, platelets, alkaline phosphatase, gamma-glutamyl transferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and alanine aminotransferase were measured regularly. Immunomodulation achieved B-cell depletion without adverse effects. After 17-36 months of rituximab, sirolimus and ERT, all subjects lacked antibodies against GAA, 4 continued to gain motor milestones, yet 2 progressed to require invasive ventilation. The absence of infusion-associated reactions allowed the use of accelerated infusion rates. B-cell depletion and T-cell immunomodulation in infants naïve to ERT was accomplished safely and eliminated immune responses against GAA, thereby optimizing clinical outcome; however, this approach did not necessarily influence sustained independent ventilation. Importantly, study outcomes support the initiation of immunomodulation before starting ERT, because the study regimen allowed for prompt initiation of treatment.",3 1 0
"Pharmacological chaperones restore function to MC4R mutants responsible for severe early-onset obesity. || Age of Onset Animals Binding Sites Brain Cell Membrane Cyclic AMP Endocytosis HEK293 Cells Humans Kinetics Mice Mice, Inbred C57BL Models, Molecular Molecular Structure Mutation, Missense Obesity Pharmaceutical Preparations Pharmacokinetics Protein Folding Protein Transport Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Transfection alpha-MSH || Heterozygous null mutations in the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) cause early-onset obesity in humans, indicating that metabolic homeostasis is sensitive to quantitative variation in MC4R function. Most of the obesity-causing MC4R mutations functionally characterized so far lead to intracellular retention of receptors by the cell's quality control system. Thus, recovering cell surface expression of mutant MC4Rs could have a beneficial therapeutic value. We tested a pharmacological chaperone approach to restore cell surface expression and function of 10 different mutant forms of human melanocortin-4 receptor found in obese patients. Five cell-permeant MC4R-selective ligands were tested and displayed pharmacological chaperone activities, restoring cell surface targeting and function of the receptors with distinct efficacy profiles for the different mutations. Such mutation-specific efficacies suggested a structure-activity relationship between compounds and mutant receptor conformations that may open a path toward personalized therapy. In addition, one of the five pharmacological chaperones restored function to most of the mutant receptors tested. Combined with its ability to reach the central nervous system and its selectivity for the MC4R, this pharmacological chaperone may represent a candidate for the development of a targeted therapy suitable for a large subset of patients with MC4R-deficient obesity.",0
"Update on mutations in glucokinase (GCK), which cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young, permanent neonatal diabetes, and hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. ||  || Glucokinase is a key regulatory enzyme in the pancreatic beta-cell. It plays a crucial role in the regulation of insulin secretion and has been termed the glucose sensor in pancreatic beta-cells. Given its central role in the regulation of insulin release it is understandable that mutations in the gene encoding glucokinase (GCK) can cause both hyper- and hypoglycemia. Heterozygous inactivating mutations in GCK cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) subtype glucokinase (GCK), characterized by mild fasting hyperglycemia, which is present at birth but often only detected later in life during screening for other purposes. Homozygous inactivating GCK mutations result in a more severe phenotype presenting at birth as permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus (PNDM). A growing number of heterozygous activating GCK mutations that cause hypoglycemia have also been reported. A total of 620 mutations in the GCK gene have been described in a total of 1,441 families. There are no common mutations, and the mutations are distributed throughout the gene. The majority of activating mutations cluster in a discrete region of the protein termed the allosteric activator site. The identification of a GCK mutation in patients with both hyper- and hypoglycemia has implications for the clinical course and clinical management of their disorder.",4 0
"Identification and characterization of aberrant GAA pre-mRNA splicing in pompe disease using a generic approach. || Adolescent Adult Child Exons Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Introns Middle Aged Mutation RNA Splicing RNA, Messenger Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction alpha-Glucosidases || Identification of pathogenic variants in monogenic diseases is an important aspect of diagnosis, genetic counseling, and prediction of disease severity. Pathogenic mechanisms involved include changes in gene expression, RNA processing, and protein translation. Variants affecting pre-mRNA splicing are difficult to predict due to the complex mechanism of splicing regulation. A generic approach to systematically detect and characterize effects of sequence variants on splicing would improve current diagnostic practice. Here, it is shown that such approach is feasible by combining flanking exon RT-PCR, sequence analysis of PCR products, and exon-internal quantitative RT-PCR for all coding exons. Application of this approach to one novel and six previously published variants in the acid-alpha glucosidase (GAA) gene causing Pompe disease enabled detection of a total of 11 novel splicing events. Aberrant splicing included cryptic splice-site usage, intron retention, and exon skipping. Importantly, the extent of leaky wild-type splicing correlated with disease onset and severity. These results indicate that this approach enables sensitive detection and in-depth characterization of variants affecting splicing, many of which are still unrecognized or poorly understood. The approach is generic and should be adaptable for application to other monogenic diseases to aid in improved diagnostics.",3 1 4 0
"Cardiac sodium channel dysfunction in sudden infant death syndrome. || Alleles Arrhythmias, Cardiac Cohort Studies DNA, Complementary Electrocardiography Electrophysiology Gene Expression Regulation Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genetic Variation Humans Infant Long QT Syndrome Mathematics Muscle Proteins Mutation, Missense NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Norway Phenotype Risk Factors Sodium Channels Sudden Infant Death || Mutations in genes responsible for the congenital long-QT syndrome, especially SCN5A, have been identified in some cases of sudden infant death syndrome. In a large-scale collaborative genetic screen, several SCN5A variants were identified in a Norwegian sudden infant death syndrome cohort (n=201). We present functional characterization of 7 missense variants (S216L, R680H, T1304M, F1486L, V1951L, F2004L, and P2006A) and 1 in-frame deletion allele (delAL586-587) identified by these efforts. Whole-cell sodium currents were measured in tsA201 cells transiently transfected with recombinant wild-type or mutant SCN5A cDNA (hH1) coexpressed with the human beta1 subunit. All variants exhibited defects in the kinetics and voltage dependence of inactivation. Five variants (S216L, T1304M, F1486L, F2004L, and P2006A) exhibited significantly increased persistent sodium currents (range, 0.5% to 1.7% of peak current) typical of SCN5A mutations associated with long-QT syndrome. These same 5 variants also displayed significant depolarizing shifts in voltage dependence of inactivation (range, 5 to 14 mV) and faster recovery from inactivation, but F1486L uniquely exhibits a depolarizing shift in the conductance-voltage relationship. Three alleles (delAL586-587, R680H, and V1951L) exhibited increased persistent current only under conditions of internal acidosis (R680H) or when expressed in the context of a common splice variant (delQ1077), indicating that they have a latent dysfunctional phenotype. Our present results greatly expand the spectrum of functionally characterized SCN5A variants associated with sudden infant death syndrome and provide further biophysical correlates of arrhythmia susceptibility in this syndrome.",0
"Natural phenylalanine hydroxylase variants that confer a mild phenotype affect the enzyme's conformational stability and oligomerization equilibrium. || Biopterin Circular Dichroism Enzyme Stability HeLa Cells Humans Immunoblotting Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Protein Conformation Protein Folding Protein Multimerization || Hyperphenylalaninemias are genetic diseases prevalently caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. The wild-type PAH enzyme is a homotetramer regulated by its substrate, cofactor and phosphorylation. We reproduced a full-length wild-type protein and seven natural full-length PAH variants, p.I65M, p.N223Y, p.R297L, p.F382L, p.K398N, p.A403V, and p.Q419R, and analyzed their biochemical and biophysical behavior. All mutants exhibited reduced enzymatic activity, namely from 38% to 69% of wild-type activity. Biophysical characterization was performed by size-exclusion chromatography, light scattering and circular dichroism. In the purified wild-type PAH, we identified the monomer in equilibrium with the dimer and tetramer. In most mutants, the equilibrium shifted toward the dimer and most tended to form aggregates. All PAH variants displayed different biophysical behaviors due to loss of secondary structure and thermal destabilization. Specifically, p.F382L was highly unstable at physiological temperature. Moreover, using confocal microscopy with the number and brightness technique, we studied the effect of BH4 addition directly in living human cells expressing wild-type PAH or p.A403V, a mild mutant associated with BH4 responsiveness in vivo. Our results demonstrate that BH4 addition promotes re-establishment of the oligomerization equilibrium, thus indicating that the dimer-to-tetramer shift in pA403V plays a key role in BH4 responsiveness. In conclusion, we show that the oligomerization process and conformational stability are altered by mutations that could affect the physiological behavior of the enzyme. This endorses the hypothesis that oligomerization and folding defects of PAH variants are the most common causes of HPAs, particularly as regards mild human phenotypes.",0
"Functional and structural characterisation of 5 missense mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU) and hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) are a group of genetic disorders predominantly caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. To date, more than 950 variants have been identified, however the pathogenic mechanism of many variants remains unknown. In this study, in silico prediction and in vitro prokaryotic and eukaryotic expression systems were used to functionally characterize five PAH missense variants (p.F233I, p.R270I, p.F331S, p.S350Y, and p.L358F) previously identified in Slovak and Czech patients. p.F233I, p.R270I, and p.S350Y were classified as deleterious mutations since they showed no specific activity in functional assay and no response to chaperone co-expression. Protein levels of these PAH variants were very low when expressed in HepG2 cells, and only p.S350Y responded to BH4 precursor overload by significant increase in PAH monomer, probably due to reduced rate of protein degradation as the result of proper protein folding. Variants p.F331S and p.L358F exerted residual enzymatic activity in vitro. While the first can be classified as probably pathogenic due to its very low protein levels in HepG2 cells, the latter is considered to be mild mutation with protein levels of approximately 17.85% compared to wt PAH. Our findings contribute to better understanding of structure and function of PAH mutated enzymes and optimal treatment of PKU patients carrying these mutations using BH4 supplementation.",0
"Identification of a point mutation in the human lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene causing infantile glycogenosis type II. || Alleles Animals Base Sequence Cell Line DNA Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel Exons Gene Expression Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Lysosomes Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Transfection alpha-Glucosidases || Two patients in a consanguineous Indian family with infantile glycogenosis type II were found to have a G to A transition in exon 11 of the human lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene. Both patients were homozygous and both parents were heterozygous for the mutant allele. The mutation causes a Glu to Lys substitution at amino acid position 521, just three amino acids downstream from the catalytic site at Asp-518. The mutation was introduced in wild type lysosomal alpha-glucosidase cDNA and the mutant construct was expressed in vitro and in vivo. The Glu to Lys substitution is proven to account for the abnormal physical properties of the patients lysosomal alpha-glucosidase precursor and to prevent the formation of catalytically active enzyme. In homozygous form it leads to the severe infantile phenotype of glycogenosis type II.",3 1 0
"iRHOM2-dependent regulation of ADAM17 in cutaneous disease and epidermal barrier function. || ADAM Proteins ADAM17 Protein Carrier Proteins Cytokines Desmosomes Epidermal Growth Factor Epidermis ErbB Receptors Esophageal Neoplasms Female Gene Expression Regulation Humans Keratinocytes Keratoderma, Palmoplantar Male Mutation RNA, Small Interfering Signal Transduction Staphylococcal Skin Infections Staphylococcus aureus Transglutaminases || iRHOM2 is a highly conserved, catalytically inactive member of the Rhomboid family, which has recently been shown to regulate the maturation of the multi-substrate ectodomain sheddase enzyme ADAM17 (TACE) in macrophages. Dominant iRHOM2 mutations are the cause of the inherited cutaneous and oesophageal cancer-susceptibility syndrome tylosis with oesophageal cancer (TOC), suggesting a role for this protein in epithelial cells. Here, using tissues derived from TOC patients, we demonstrate that TOC-associated mutations in iRHOM2 cause an increase in the maturation and activity of ADAM17 in epidermal keratinocytes, resulting in significantly upregulated shedding of ADAM17 substrates, including EGF-family growth factors and pro-inflammatory cytokines. This activity is accompanied by increased EGFR activity, increased desmosome processing and the presence of immature epidermal desmosomes, upregulated epidermal transglutaminase activity and heightened resistance to Staphylococcal infection in TOC keratinocytes. Many of these features are consistent with the presence of a constitutive wound-healing-like phenotype in TOC epidermis, which may shed light on a novel pathway in skin repair, regeneration and inflammation.",0
"An African-specific polymorphism in the TP53 gene impairs p53 tumor suppressor function in a mouse model. || African Continental Ancestry Group Animals Carcinoma, Hepatocellular Cell Death Cell Line Cisplatin Codon Disease Models, Animal Genes, p53 Humans Mice Mice, Inbred C57BL Neoplasms Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Protein Binding Risk Factors Transcriptional Activation Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || A nonsynonymous single-nucleotide polymorphism at codon 47 in TP53 exists in African-descent populations (P47S, rs1800371; referred to here as S47). Here we report that, in human cell lines and a mouse model, the S47 variant exhibits a modest decrease in apoptosis in response to most genotoxic stresses compared with wild-type p53 but exhibits a significant defect in cell death induced by cisplatin. We show that, compared with wild-type p53, S47 has nearly indistinguishable transcriptional function but shows impaired ability to transactivate a subset of p53 target genes, including two involved in metabolism:Gls2(glutaminase 2) and Sco2 We also show that human and mouse cells expressing the S47 variant are markedly resistant to cell death by agents that induce ferroptosis (iron-mediated nonapoptotic cell death). We show that mice expressing S47 in homozygous or heterozygous form are susceptible to spontaneous cancers of diverse histological types. Our data suggest that the S47 variant may contribute to increased cancer risk in individuals of African descent, and our findings highlight the need to assess the contribution of this variant to cancer risk in these populations. These data also confirm the potential relevance of metabolism and ferroptosis to tumor suppression by p53.",0
"Bioinformatic Analysis of GJB2 Gene Missense Mutations. || Binding Sites Computational Biology Connexins Conserved Sequence Humans Models, Molecular Mutation, Missense Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Protein Domains || Gap junction beta 2 (GJB2) gene is the most commonly mutated connexin gene in patients with autosomal recessive and dominant hearing loss. According to Ensembl (release 74) database, 1347 sequence variations are reported in the GJB2 gene and about 13.5% of them are categorized as missense SNPs or nonsynonymous variant. Because of the high incidence of GJB2 mutations in hearing loss patients, revealing the molecular effect of GJB2 mutations on protein structure may also provide clear point of view regarding the molecular etiology of deafness. Hence, the aim of this study is to analyze structural and functional consequences of all known GJB2 missense variations to the Cx26 protein by applying multiple bioinformatics methods. Two-hundred and eleven nonsynonymous variants were collected from Ensembl release 74, Leiden Open Variation Database (LOVD) and The Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD). A number of bioinformatic tools were utilized for predicting the effect of GJB2 missense mutations at the sequence, structural, and functional levels. Some of the mutations were found to locate highly conserved regions and have structural and functional properties. Moreover, GJB2 mutations were also found to affect Cx26 protein at the molecular level via loss or gain of disorder, catalytic site, and post-translational modifications, including methylation, glycosylation, and ubiquitination. Findings, presented here, demonstrated the application of bioinformatic algorithms to predict the effects of mutations causing hearing impairment. I expect, this type of analysis will serve as a start point for future experimental evaluation of the GJB2 gene mutations and it will also be helpful in evaluating other deafness-related gene mutations.",0
"Familial hypercholesterolemia in China. Identification of mutations in the LDL-receptor gene that result in a receptor-negative phenotype. || Adolescent Adult Base Sequence Binding Sites Blotting, Southern Child China Codon Coronary Disease Female Gene Deletion Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Point Mutation Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Receptors, LDL || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), caused by many different mutations in the low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-receptor gene, invariably leads to severe premature coronary heart disease (CHD) in homozygous individuals. Heterozygous FH patients are less severely affected but are still at increased risk of CHD in most populations. Although FH homozygotes in China are affected similarly to those elsewhere, heterozygotes are not detected in the general population and obligate heterozygotes are often not hypercholesterolemic by Western standards. Mutations in the LDL-receptor genes of 10 homozygous FH patients from the Jiang-su province of China and their heterozygous parents were analyzed. These include one large and two minor deletions and eight point mutations: four are predicted to introduce a premature stop codon, five to result in a single amino acid substitution or deletion, and one to produce a protein with an abnormal cytoplasmic tail. Expression of the mutant LDL-receptor cDNAs in vitro confirmed that these mutations impaired LDL-receptor function and that several would cause a receptor-negative phenotype. Thus, the lack of clinical expression in obligate FH heterozygotes is not due to unusually ""mild"" mutations in the LDL-receptor gene, and other genetic or environmental factors must therefore be important in determining phenotypic expression.",4 0
"A series of maturity onset diabetes of the young, type 2 (MODY2) mouse models generated by a large-scale ENU mutagenesis program. || Amino Acid Sequence Animals Blood Glucose Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Disease Models, Animal Ethylnitrosourea Female Gene Expression Glucokinase Glucose Tolerance Test Homozygote Insulin Insulin Resistance Liver Male Mice Mice, Mutant Strains Molecular Sequence Data Mutagenesis Phenotype Point Mutation RNA, Messenger || Mutant mouse models are indispensable tools for clarifying the functions of genes and for elucidating the underlying pathogenic mechanisms of human diseases. Currently, several large-scale mutagenesis projects that employ the chemical mutagen N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU) are underway worldwide. One specific aim of our ENU mutagenesis project is to generate diabetic mouse models. We screened 9375 animals for dominant traits using a clinical biochemical test and thereby identified 11 mutations in the glucokinase (Gk) gene that were associated with hyperglycemia. GK is a key regulator of insulin secretion in the pancreatic beta-cell. Approximately 190 heterozygous mutations in the human GK gene have been reported to cause maturity onset diabetes of the young, type 2 (MODY2). In addition, five mutations have been reported to cause permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus (PNDM) when present on both alleles. The mutations in our 11 hyperglycemic mutants are located at different positions in Gk. Four have also been found in human MODY2 patients, and another mutant bears its mutation at the same location that is mutated in a PNDM patient. Thus, ENU mutagenesis is effective for developing mouse models for various human genetic diseases, including diabetes mellitus. Some of our Gk mutant lines displayed impaired glucose-responsive insulin secretion and the mutations had different effects on Gk mRNA levels and/or the stability of the GK protein. This collection of Gk mutants will be valuable for understanding GK gene function, for dissecting the function of the enzyme and as models of human MODY2 and PNDM.",0
"Rapid progressive course of later-onset Pompe disease in Chinese patients. || Adolescent Adult Asian Continental Ancestry Group Enzyme Replacement Therapy Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Point Mutation Respiration, Artificial Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Taiwan Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease presents with a wide variety of phenotypes ranging from a fatal disease in infancy (the infantile-onset form) to other milder later-onset forms. Currently, the clinical manifestations in Chinese patients with later-onset Pompe disease are still not well understood. Fifteen Chinese patients who were clinically diagnosed with Pompe disease at later than one year of age at the National Taiwan University Hospital from 1993 to 2009 were included in this study. Confirmatory diagnosis included both biochemical and molecular tests. Patient outcomes after recombinant human acid α-glucosidase (GAA) therapy were also evaluated by assessing the percentage of predicted forced vital capacity in the upright position, hours of daily ventilator use, and the functional status change using Walton Gardner Medwin Scale. The median age at symptom onset was 15 (12-35)years, and the median age at diagnosis was 21 (10-38)years. At the time of diagnosis or shortly after, 8 patients (53%) required mechanical ventilation. A quadriceps muscle biopsy from a 13-year-old boy already showed extensive glycogen storage and muscle fiber destruction. Mutation analysis revealed that the two dual mutations in the GAA gene c.[1935C>A; 1726G>A] (p.[D645E; G576S]) and c.[2238G>C; 1726G>A] (p.[W746C; G576S]) represented 66.5% of the mutated chromosomes. Using mutagenesis, we showed that the p.G576S pseudodeficiency mutation significantly decreased the residual enzyme activity of p.W746C. Most patients responded poorly to recombinant human GAA. Chinese patients with later-onset Pompe disease often showed onset of symptoms in their second decade of life with rapid disease progression, which is probably due to a specific pattern of GAA gene mutation. Therefore, early diagnosis and early treatment would be necessary to improve the prognosis of these patients.",3 1 4 0
"Tumour p53 mutations exhibit promoter selective dominance over wild type p53. || Alleles Cell Transformation, Neoplastic Codon Genes, p53 Humans Mutation Promoter Regions, Genetic Response Elements Transcriptional Activation || The tumour suppressor gene p53 is frequently mutated in human cancer. Tumour derived p53 mutants are usually transcriptionally inactive, but some mutants retain the ability to transactivate a subset of p53 target genes. In addition to simple loss of function, some p53 mutants may be carcinogenic through a dominant negative mechanism. Aiming at a more general classification of p53 mutants into predictive functional categories it is important to determine (i) which p53 mutants are dominant, (ii) what features characterize dominant mutants and (iii) whether dominance is target gene specific. The ability of 71 p53 mutants to inhibit wild type p53 was determined using a simple yeast transcriptional assay. Approximately 30% of the mutants were dominant. They preferentially affect highly conserved amino acids (P<0.005), which are frequently mutated in tumours (P<0.005), and usually located near the DNA binding surface of the protein (P<0.001). Different tumour-derived amino acid substitutions at the same codon usually have the same dominance phenotype. To determine whether the ability of p53 mutants to inhibit wild type p53 is target gene specific, the dominance towards p21, bax, and PIG3 binding sites was examined. Approximately 40% of the 45 mutants examined were dominant for the p21 (17/45) or PIG3 (20/45) responsive elements and 71% (32/45) were dominant for the bax responsive element. These differences are statistically significant (p21 vs bax, P<0.003; bax vs PIG3, P<0.02, Fisher's exact test) and defined a hierarchy of dominance. Finally, we extended the analysis to a group of mutants isolated in BRCA-associated tumours, some of which retained wild type level of transcription in yeast as well as in human cells, but show gain of function in transformation assays. Since transformation assays require transdominant inhibition of the endogenous wild type allele, one possible explanation for the behaviour of the BRCA-associated mutants is that they adopt conformations able to bind DNA alone but not in mixed tetramers with wild type p53. The yeast data do not support this explanation, because all BRCA-associated mutants that behaved as wild type in transcription assay were recessive in dominance assays.",0
"Founder and recurrent CDH1 mutations in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. ||  || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer is caused by germline mutations in the epithelial cadherin (CDH1) gene and is characterized by an increased risk for diffuse gastric cancer and lobular breast cancer. To determine whether recurring germline CDH1 mutations occurred due to independent mutational events or common ancestry. Thirty-eight families diagnosed clinically with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer were accrued between November 2004 and January 2006 and were analyzed for CDH1 mutations as part of an ongoing study at the British Columbia Cancer Agency. Twenty-six families had at least 2 gastric cancer cases with 1 case of diffuse gastric cancer in a person younger than 50 years; 12 families had either a single case of diffuse gastric cancer diagnosed in a person younger than 35 years or multiple cases of diffuse gastric cancer diagnosed in persons older than 50 years. Classification of family members as carriers or noncarriers of CDH1 mutations. Haplotype analysis to assess recurring mutations for common ancestry was performed on 7 families from this study and 7 previously reported families with the same mutations. Thirteen mutations (6 novel) were identified in 15 of the 38 families (40% detection rate). The 1137G>A splicing mutation and the 1901C>T (A634V) missense/splicing mutation occurred on common haplotypes in 2 families but on different haplotypes in a third family. The 2195G>A (R732Q) missense/splicing mutation occurred in 2 families on different haplotypes. The 2064-2065delTG mutation occurred on a common haplotype in 2 families. Two families from this study plus 2 additional families carrying the novel 2398delC mutation shared a common haplotype, suggesting a founder effect. All 4 families originate from the southeast coast of Newfoundland. Due to concentrations of lobular breast cancer cases, 2 branches of this family had been diagnosed as having hereditary breast cancer and were tested for BRCA mutations. Within these 4 families, the cumulative risk by age 75 years in mutation carriers for clinically detected gastric cancer was 40% (95% confidence interval [CI], 12%-91%) for males and 63% (95% CI, 19%-99%) for females and the risk for breast cancer in female mutation carriers was 52% (95% CI, 29%-94%). Recurrent CDH1 mutations in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer are due to both independent mutational events and common ancestry. The presence of a founder mutation from Newfoundland is strongly supported.",2 4 0 3
"Prevalence of mutations and functional analyses of melanocortin 4 receptor variants identified among 750 men with juvenile-onset obesity. || Adult Cohort Studies Humans Male Mutation Obesity Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 || Mutations in the gene encoding the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) are associated with the most common monogenic form of obesity. We examined 750 Danish men with juvenile-onset obesity (body mass index 33.3 +/- 2.4 kg/m(2)) and 706 control subjects (body mass index 21.4 +/- 2.1 kg/m(2)) for mutations in MC4R. A total of 14 different mutations were identified of which two, Ala219Val and Leu325Phe, were novel variants. The variant receptor, Leu325Phe, was unable to bind [Nle4,d-Phe7]-alphaMSH, whereas the Ala219Val variant showed a significantly impaired melanotan II induction of cAMP, compared with the wild-type receptor. The remaining 11 mutations have previously been reported, but selected MC4R variants were further characterized in vitro in the present study. A previously identified nonsense mutation, Tyr35stop, had a relatively high allele frequency (0.6%), suggesting a possible founder effect in the Danish population. This study shows a carrier frequency of 2.5% of pathogenic mutations in the MC4R gene in a population-based study of obese men. Thus, variation in this gene is the most common known specific genetic cause of obesity among Scandinavian men.",4 0
"Organization and sequence of human cardiac myosin binding protein C gene (MYBPC3) and identification of mutations predicted to produce truncated proteins in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. ||  || Cardiac myosin binding protein C (MyBP-C) is a sarcomeric protein belonging to the intracellular immunoglobulin superfamily. Its function is uncertain, but for a decade evidence has existed for both structural and regulatory roles. The gene encoding cardiac MyBP-C (MYBPC3) in humans is located on chromosome 11p11.2, and mutations have been identified in this gene in unrelated families with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC). Detailed characterization of the MYBPC3 gene is essential for studies on gene regulation, analysis of the role of MyBP-C in cardiac contraction through the use of recombinant DNA technology, and mutational analyses of FHC. The organization of human MYBPC3 and screening for mutations in a panel of French families with FHC were established using polymerase chain reaction, single-strand conformation polymorphism, and sequencing. The MYBPC3 gene comprises > 21,000 base pairs and contains 35 exons. Two exons are unusually small in size, 3 bp each. We found six new mutations associated with FHC in seven unrelated French families. Four of these mutations are predicted to produce truncated cardiac MyBP-C polypeptides. The two others should each produce two aberrant proteins, one truncated and one mutated. The present study provides the first organization and sequence for an MyBP-C gene. The mutations reported here and previously in MYBPC3 result in aberrant transcripts that are predicted to encode significantly truncated cardiac MyBP-C polypeptides. This spectrum of mutations differs from the ones previously observed in other disease genes causing FHC. Our data strengthen the functional importance of MyBP-C in the regulation of cardiac work and provide the basis for further studies.",2 0
"Structural features of the regulatory ACT domain of phenylalanine hydroxylase. || Amino Acid Sequence Humans Hydrogen Bonding Hydrophobic and Hydrophilic Interactions Models, Molecular Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Protein Conformation Protein Interaction Domains and Motifs || Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) catalyzes the conversion of L-Phe to L-Tyr. Defects in PAH activity, caused by mutations in the human gene, result in the autosomal recessively inherited disease hyperphenylalaninemia. PAH activity is regulated by multiple factors, including phosphorylation and ligand binding. In particular, PAH displays positive cooperativity for L-Phe, which is proposed to bind the enzyme on an allosteric site in the N-terminal regulatory domain (RD), also classified as an ACT domain. This domain is found in several proteins and is able to bind amino acids. We used molecular dynamics simulations to obtain dynamical and structural insights into the isolated RD of PAH. Here we show that the principal motions involve conformational changes leading from an initial open to a final closed domain structure. The global intrinsic motions of the RD are correlated with exposure to solvent of a hydrophobic surface, which corresponds to the ligand binding-site of the ACT domain. Our results strongly suggest a relationship between the Phe-binding function and the overall dynamic behaviour of the enzyme. This relationship may be affected by structure-disturbing mutations. To elucidate the functional implications of the mutations, we investigated the structural effects on the dynamics of the human RD PAH induced by six missense hyperphenylalaninemia-causing mutations, namely p.G46S, p.F39C, p.F39L, p.I65S, p.I65T and p.I65V. These studies showed that the alterations in RD hydrophobic interactions induced by missense mutations could affect the functionality of the whole enzyme.",0
"Evidence that the V832M E-cadherin germ-line missense mutation does not influence the affinity of alpha -catenin for the cadherin/catenin complex. || Animals CHO Cells Cadherins Cell Line Cell Proliferation Cricetinae Cricetulus Germ-Line Mutation Glutamic Acid Humans Mutant Proteins Mutation, Missense Protein Binding Valine alpha Catenin beta Catenin || Mutations in E-cadherin are associated with a number of diseases, and have been shown to contribute to disease progression. In particular, 50% of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer cases have inactivating mutations in the E-cadherin gene. An interesting mutation near the beta-catenin-binding site on the cytoplasmic domain of E-cadherin (V832M) was recently reported that produces full-length protein, but exhibits decreased binding of alpha -catenin to the cadherin/catenin complex. The study was done by transfecting mutant E-cadherin into Chinese hamster ovary fibroblast cells. Here we show that the previously reported characteristics of this mutation do not apply to human epithelial cells expressing this mutant protein and suggest that the mechanism whereby the V832M mutation in human E-cadherin promotes gastric cancer is not yet understood.",0
"Plasma mutant α-galactosidase A protein and globotriaosylsphingosine level in Fabry disease. ||  || Fabry disease is an X-linked genetic disorder characterized by deficient activity of α-galactosidase A (GLA) and accumulation of glycolipids, and various GLA gene mutations lead to a wide range of clinical phenotypes from the classic form to the later-onset one. To investigate the biochemical heterogeneity and elucidate the basis of the disease using available clinical samples, we measured GLA activity, GLA protein and accumulated globotriaosylsphingosine (Lyso-Gb3), a biomarker of this disease, in plasma samples from Fabry patients. The analysis revealed that both the enzyme activity and the protein level were apparently decreased, and the enzyme activity was well correlated with the protein level in many Fabry patients. In these cases, a defect of biosynthesis or excessive degradation of mutant GLAs should be involved in the pathogenesis, and the residual protein level would determine the accumulation of Lyso-Gb3 and the severity of the disease. However, there are some exceptional cases, i.e., ones harboring p.C142Y, p.R112H and p.M296I, who exhibit a considerable amount of GLA protein. Especially, a subset of Fabry patients with p.R112H or p.M296I has been attracted interest because the patients exhibit almost normal plasma Lyso-Gb3 concentration. Structural analysis revealed that C142Y causes a structural change at the entrance of the active site. It will lead to a complete enzyme activity deficiency, resulting in a high level of plasma Lyso-Gb3 and the classic Fabry disease. On the other hand, it is thought that R112H causes a relatively large structural change on the molecular surface, and M296I a small one in a restricted region from the core to the surface, both the structural changes being far from the active site. These changes will cause not only partial degradation but also degeneration of the mutant GLA proteins, and the degenerated enzymes exhibiting small and residual activity remain and probably facilitate degradation of Lyso-Gb3 in plasma, leading to the later-onset phenotype. The results of this comprehensive analysis will be useful for elucidation of the basis of Fabry disease.",0
"Characterization of p53 oligomerization domain mutations isolated from Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni like family members. || Apoptosis Arginine Cell Division Cysteine DNA Probes Humans Leucine Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Neoplasm Proteins Nuclear Proteins Proline Proto-Oncogene Proteins Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-mdm2 Transcriptional Activation Tumor Cells, Cultured Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || p53 is a tumour suppressor gene which functions as a transcription factor to upregulate genes for growth arrest and apoptosis following DNA damage. p53 mutations are associated with Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni like syndromes. Recently mutations of the oligomerization domain have been isolated from an LFS and an LFL family affecting respectively codon 344 (Leu to Pro) and 337 (Arg to Cys). The present study was designed to determine the affect of these mutations on the function of p53 protein. p53 344 Leu to Pro existed only in a monomeric form and could not bind to DNA. It was inactive at inducing apoptosis, transactivating luciferase from a bax promoter and inhibiting cell growth. In contrast, p53 337 Arg to Cys could form tetramers and could bind to DNA. However, p53 337 Arg to Cys was not fully active and could only induce apoptosis, transactivate luciferase from a bax promoter and inhibit cell growth with approximately 60% of the ability of wild-type p53. Both mutant proteins had reduced ability to bind to MDM2, p53 337 Arg to Cys being more reduced than p53 344 Leu to Pro. These results indicate that point mutations in the oligomerization domain can disrupt p53 function. In addition, the value of LFS and LFL families for the further understanding of the biological and biochemical properties of p53 is demonstrated.",0
"Inactive full-length p53 mutants lacking dominant wild-type p53 inhibition highlight loss of heterozygosity as an important aspect of p53 status in human cancers. || Cell Line, Tumor Genes, Reporter Genes, p53 Humans Loss of Heterozygosity Mutation Neoplasms Saccharomyces cerevisiae || Over 1000 different mutants of the tumor suppressor protein p53 with one amino acid change in the core domain have been reported in human cancers. In mouse knock-in models, two frequent mutants displayed loss of wild-type (wt) p53 function, inhibition of wt p53 and wt p53-independent gain of function. The remaining mutants have been systematically characterized for loss of wt p53 function, but not other phenotypes. We report the concomitant assessment of loss of function and interference with wt p53 using URA3-based p53 yeast and confirmatory mammalian assays. We studied 76 mutants representing 54% of over 15 000 reported missense core domain mutations. The majority showed the expected complete loss of wt p53 function and dominant p53 inhibition. A few infrequent p53 mutants had wt p53-like activity. Remarkably, one-third showed no interference with wt p53 despite loss of wt p53 function at 37 degrees C. Half of this group consisted of temperature-sensitive p53 mutants, but the other half was surprisingly made up of mutants with complete loss of wt p53 function. Our findings illustrate the diverse behavior of p53 mutants and mechanisms of malignant transformation by p53 mutants. The identification of full-length p53 mutants without dominant inhibition of wt p53 highlights the importance of determining the status of the wt p53 allele in human cancers, in particular in the context of clinical studies. In the case of p53 mutants with no or weak dominant p53 inhibition, presence of the wt allele may indicate a good prognosis cancer, whereas loss of heterozygosity may spell an aggressive, therapy-resistant cancer.",0
"Germline and somatic cancer-associated mutations in the ATP-binding motifs of PTEN influence its subcellular localization and tumor suppressive function. || Adenosine Triphosphate Amino Acid Motifs Amino Acid Sequence Cell Line, Tumor Female Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Protein Binding Protein Transport Sequence Alignment || Germline and somatic PTEN mutations are found in Cowden syndrome (CS) and multiple sporadic malignancies, respectively. PTEN function appears to be modulated by subcellular compartmentalization, and mislocalization may affect function. We have shown that cellular ATP levels affect nuclear PTEN levels. Here, we examined the ATP-binding capabilities of PTEN and functional consequences, relevant to cancer-associated mutations. PTEN mutation analysis of CS patients and sporadic colorectal carcinomas and comparative aminoacid analysis were utilized to identify mutations in ATP-binding motifs. The ability of wild-type (WT) or mutant PTEN to bind ATP was assessed by ATP-agarose-binding assays. Subcellular fractionation, western blotting, confocal microscopy and growth assays were used to determine relative nuclear-cytoplasmic localization and function. Somatic colorectal carcinoma-derived PTEN missense mutations were associated with nuclear mislocalization. These mutations altered cellular proliferation, apoptosis and anchorage-dependent growth. Examination of PTEN's amino acid sequence revealed these mutations resided in previously undescribed ATP-binding motifs (c.60-73; c.122-136). In contrast to WT PTEN, both cancer-associated somatic and germline-derived PTEN missense mutations, which lie within the ATP-binding motifs, result in mutant PTEN that does not bind ATP efficiently. We also show that CS patients with germline ATP-binding motif-mutations had nuclear PTEN mislocalization. Of four unrelated patients with functional germline ATP-binding domain mutations, all three female patients had breast cancers. Germline and somatic mutations within PTEN's ATP-binding domain play important pathogenic roles in both heritable and sporadic carcinogenesis by PTEN nuclear mislocalization resulting in altered signaling and growth. Manipulation of ATP may represent novel therapies in tumors with such PTEN alterations.",0
"Biallelic and heterozygous point mutations in the runt domain of the AML1/PEBP2alphaB gene associated with myeloblastic leukemias. || Adult Aged Alleles Binding Sites Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA DNA-Binding Proteins Dimerization Female Heterozygote Humans Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute Male Middle Aged Point Mutation Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Proto-Oncogene Proteins Receptor, Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Transcription Factors Transcriptional Activation Transfection Tumor Cells, Cultured || The AML1 gene encoding the DNA-binding alpha-subunit in the Runt domain family of heterodimeric transcription factors has been noted for its frequent involvement in chromosomal translocations associated with leukemia. Using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) combined with nonisotopic RNase cleavage assay (NIRCA), we found point mutations of the AML1 gene in 8 of 160 leukemia patients: silent mutations, heterozygous missense mutations, and biallelic nonsense or frameshift mutations in 2, 4, and 2 cases, respectively. The mutations were all clustered within the Runt domain. Missense mutations identified in 3 patients showed neither DNA binding nor transactivation, although being active in heterodimerization. These defective missense mutants may be relevant to the predisposition or progression of leukemia. On the other hand, the biallelic nonsense mutants encoding truncated AML1 proteins lost almost all functions examined and may play a role in leukemogenesis leading to acute myeloblastic leukemia.",0
"RUNX1, but not its familial platelet disorder mutants, synergistically activates PF4 gene expression in combination with ETS family proteins. || Blood Platelet Disorders Cell Line Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay Gene Expression Regulation Humans Mutation Platelet Factor 4 Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ets Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction Subcellular Fractions || Familial platelet disorder (FPD) is a rare autosomal dominant disease characterized by thrombocytopenia and abnormal platelet function. Causal mutations have been identified in the gene encoding runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) of FPD patients. To elucidate the role of RUNX1 in the regulation of expression of platelet factor 4 (PF4) and to propose a plausible mechanism underlying RUNX1-mediated induction of the FPD phenotype. We assessed whether RUNX1 and its mutants, in combination with E26 transformation-specific-1 (ETS-1), Core-binding factor subunit beta (CBFβ), and Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI-1), cooperatively regulate PF4 expression during megakaryocytic differentiation. In an embryonic stem cell differentiation system, expression levels of endogenous and exogenous RUNX1 and PF4 were determined by real-time RT-PCR. Promoter activation by the transcription factors were evaluated by reporter gene assays with HepG2 cells. DNA binding activity and protein interaction were analyzed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and immunoprecipitation assay with Cos-7 cells, respectively. Protein localization was analyzed by immunocytochemistry and Western blotting with Cos-7 cells. We demonstrated that RUNX1 activates endogenous PF4 expression in megakaryocytic differentiation. RUNX1, but not its mutants, in combination with ETS-1 and CBFβ, or FLI-1, synergistically activated the PF4 promoter. Each RUNX1 mutant harbors various functional abnormalities, including loss of DNA-binding activity, abnormal subcellular localization, and/or alterations of binding affinities for ETS-1, CBFβ, and FLI-1. RUNX1, but not its mutants, strongly and synergistically activates PF4 expression along with ETS family proteins. Furthermore, loss of the RUNX1 transcriptional activation function is induced by various functional abnormalities.",0
"Rapid preparation of (3R,4S,5R) polyhydroxylated pyrrolidine-based libraries to discover a pharmacological chaperone for treatment of Fabry disease. || Animals COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops Drug Design Drug Stability Enzyme Inhibitors Fabry Disease Humans Hydroxylation Kinetics Mutation Pyrrolidines Small Molecule Libraries Stereoisomerism Temperature alpha-Galactosidase || The rapid discovery of a pharmacological chaperone toward human α-Gal A for the treatment of Fabry disease is described. Two polyhydroxylated pyrrolidines with the (3R,4S,5R) configuration pattern underwent rapid substituent diversity by conjugating the primary aminomethyl moiety of each with a variety of carboxylic acids to generate two libraries (2 × 60 members). Our bioevaluation results showed one member with the (2R,3R,4S,5R) configuration pattern and bearing a 5-cyclohexylpentanoyl group as a substituent moiety possessed sufficient chaperoning capability to rescue α-Gal A activity in the lymphocyte of the N215S Fabry patient-derived cell line and other α-Gal A mutants in COS7 cells.",0
"PALB2 analysis in BRCA2-like families. || Adult Aged Amino Acid Substitution BRCA2 Protein Breast Neoplasms Breast Neoplasms, Male Exons Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group N Protein Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Middle Aged Neoplasms Nuclear Proteins Ovarian Neoplasms Pancreatic Neoplasms Pedigree Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Prevalence Risk Factors Tumor Suppressor Proteins Young Adult || BRCA2 and PALB2 function together in the Fanconi anemia (FA)-Breast Cancer (BRCA) pathway. Mono-allelic and bi-allelic BRCA2 and PALB2 mutation carriers share many clinical characteristics. Mono-allelic germline mutations of BRCA2 and PALB2 are risk alleles of female breast cancer and have also been reported in familial pancreatic cancer, and bi-allelic mutations cause a severe form of Fanconi anemia. In view of these similarities, we investigated whether the prevalence of PALB2 mutations was increased in breast cancer families with the occurrence of BRCA2 associated tumours other than female breast cancer. PALB2 mutation analysis was performed in 110 non-BRCA1/2 cancer patients: (a) 53 ovarian cancer patients from female breast-and/or ovarian cancer families; (b) 45 breast cancer patients with a first or second degree relative with pancreatic cancer; and (c) 12 male breast cancer patients from female breast cancer families. One truncating PALB2 mutation, c.509_510delGA, resulting in p.Arg170X, was found in a male breast cancer patient. We conclude that germline mutations of PALB2 do not significantly contribute to cancer risk in non-BRCA1/2 cancer families with at least one patient with ovarian cancer, male breast cancer, and/or pancreatic cancer.",0
"Novel GAA sequence variant c.1211 A>G reduces enzyme activity but not protein expression in infantile and adult onset Pompe disease. || Age of Onset Case-Control Studies Female Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II HEK293 Cells Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Mutation Mutation, Missense Pedigree Phenotype Pregnancy Quadriceps Muscle RNA Splicing Reference Values || Pompe disease is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous autosomal recessive disorder caused by lysosomal acid α-glucosidase (GAA) deficiency. We report on two affected members of a non-consanguineous Caucasian family, including a classical infantile-onset patient with severe cardiomyopathy (IO) and his paternal grandmother with the adult-onset (AO) form. Two compound heterozygous sequence variants of the GAA gene were identified in each patient by mutation analyses (IO=c.1211A>G and c.1798C>T; AO=c.1211A>G and c.692+5G>T). For this study, the biochemical phenotype resulting from the missense mutation c.1211A>G in exon 8, which converts a highly conserved aspartate to glycine (p.Asp404Gly), was of specific interest because it had not been reported previously. Western blotting revealed a robust expression of all GAA isoforms in quadriceps muscle of both patients (fully CRIM positive), while enzymatic activity was 3.6% (IO) and 6.6% (AO) of normal controls. To further validate these findings, the c.1211A>G sequence variant was introduced in wild type GAA cDNA and over-expressed in HEK293T cells. Site-directed mutagenesis analyses confirmed that the mutation does not affect processing or expression of GAA protein, but rather impairs enzyme function. Similar results were reported for c.1798C>T (p.Arg600Cys), which further supports the biochemical phenotype observed in IO. The third mutation (c.692+5G>T, in intron 3) was predicted to affect normal splicing of the GAA mRNA, and qPCR indeed verified a 4-fold lower mRNA expression in AO. It is concluded that the novel sequence variant c.1211A>G results in full CRIM but significantly lower GAA activity, which in combination with c.1798C>T leads to infantile-onset Pompe disease. We surmise that the difference in disease severity between the two family members in this study is due to a milder effect of the intronic mutation c.692+5G>T (vs. c.1798C>T) on phenotype, partially preserving GAA activity and delaying onset in the proband (paternal grandmother).",3 1 0
"Functional characterization and structural modeling of obesity associated mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor. ||  || Mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) gene are the most common known cause of monogenic human obesity. The MC4R gene was sequenced in 2000 subjects with severe early-onset obesity. We detected seven different nonsense and 19 nonsynonymous mutations in a total of 94 probands, some of which have been reported previously by others. We functionally characterized the 11 novel obesity associated missense mutations. Seven of these mutants (L54P, E61K, I69T, S136P, M161T, T162I, and I269N) showed impaired cell surface trafficking, reduced level of maximal binding of the radioligand [125I]NDP-MSH, and reduced ability to generate cAMP in response to ligand. Four mutant MC4Rs (G55V, G55D, S136F, and A303T) displayed cell surface expression and agonist binding similar to the wild-type receptor but showed impaired cAMP production, suggesting that these residues are likely to be critical for conformational rearrangement essential for receptor activation. Homology modeling of these mutants using a model of MC4R based on the crystal structure of the beta2-adrenoreceptor was used to provide insights into the possible structural basis for receptor dysfunction. Transmembrane (TM) domains 1, 3, 6, 7, and peripheral helix 8 appear to participate in the agonist-induced conformational rearrangement necessary for coupling of ligand binding to signaling. We conclude that G55V, G55D, S136F, and A303T mutations are likely to strengthen helix-helix interactions between TM1 and TM2, TM3 and TM6, and TM7 and helix 8, respectively, preventing relative movement of these helices during receptor activation. The combination of functional studies and structural modeling of naturally occurring pathogenic mutations in MC4R can provide valuable information regarding the molecular mechanism of MC4R activation and its dysfunction in human disease.",4 0
"Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome mutations in p53 are associated with exonic methylation and splicing regulatory elements. || Codon CpG Islands DNA Methylation DNA Mutational Analysis Enhancer Elements, Genetic Exons Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Mutation RNA Splicing Regulatory Sequences, Nucleic Acid Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Mutations in codon 133 of p53, which cause the loss of the Delta 133 isoform(s) expression, are very frequent in the Li-Fraumeni (LF) and Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) syndromes. In sporadic cancers, silent p53 mutations are correlated with exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs) and exonic methylated sites. The present study shows that mutations in splice sites are also very frequent in LF/LFL syndromes, while missense mutations are less common compared to other familial or sporadic cancers (P = 0 in both cases). Furthermore, it is shown that the codons at which LF/LFL germline missense mutations occur, correlate with CpG-containing ESEs (r = 0.181, P = 0.014) which are all methylated in p53. While both silent and LF/LFL missense mutations correlate with SC35 motifs, only the latter are associated with SRp55. On the contrary, only silent mutations in sporadic cancers correlate with SF2/ASF motifs in p53. Moreover, 12.1% of LF/LFL missense mutations involve the formation of potential splice sites of considerable splicing scores. Finally, mutations that are not at, or adjacent to CpGs (+/-1 codon, 34% of all LF/LFL mutated sites), introduce considerable changes of the ESE scores (>1.3 score change). The above data verify that LF/LFL missense mutations probably result also in splicing deregulation, in addition to any changes of the protein function and are mostly associated with alterations of the exonic methylation landscape. Some of the ESEs affected in LF/LFL syndromes are also genetically unstable in sporadic cancers but non-CpG cytosine instability, which is predominantly associated with specific ESEs, is only common in sporadic cancers.",0
"The use of targeted exome sequencing in genetic diagnosis of young patients with severe hypercholesterolemia. || Adolescent Animals CHO Cells Cricetulus DNA Mutational Analysis Exome Female HEK293 Cells Humans Hypercholesterolemia Male Molecular Diagnostic Techniques Receptors, LDL Sequence Analysis, DNA || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disorder. Although genetic testing is an important tool for detecting FH-causing mutations in patients, diagnostic methods for young patients with severe hypercholesterolemia are understudied. This study compares the target exome sequencing (TES) technique with the DNA resequencing array technique on young patients with severe hypercholesterolemia. A total of 20 unrelated patients (mean age 14.8 years) with total cholesterol > 10 mmol/L were included. 12 patient samples were processed by DNA resequencing array, 14 patient samples were processed by TES, and 6 patient samples were processed by both methods. Functional characterization of novel mutations was performed by flow cytometry. The mutation detection rate (MDR) of DNA resequencing array was 75%, while the MDR of TES was 100%. A total of 27 different mutations in the LDLR were identified, including 3 novel mutations and 8 mutations with previously unknown pathogenicity. Functional characterization of c.673delA, c.1363delC, p.Leu575Phe and p.Leu582Phe variants found that all of them are pathogenic. Additionally, 7 patients were diagnosed with Heterozygous FH (HeFH) in which lipid levels were significantly higher than common HeFH patients. This data indicates that TES is a very efficient tool for genetic diagnosis in young patients with severe hypercholesterolemia.",4 0
"The pharmacological chaperone 1-deoxynojirimycin increases the activity and lysosomal trafficking of multiple mutant forms of acid alpha-glucosidase. ||  || Pompe disease is a lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) caused by mutations in the gene that encodes acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA). Recently, small molecule pharmacological chaperones have been shown to increase protein stability and cellular levels for mutant lysosomal enzymes and have emerged as a new therapeutic strategy for the treatment of LSDs. In this study, we characterized the pharmacological chaperone 1-deoxynojirimycin (DNJ) on 76 different mutant forms of GAA identified in Pompe disease. DNJ significantly increased enzyme activity and protein levels for 16 different GAA mutants in patient-derived fibroblasts and in transiently transfected COS-7 cells. Additionally, DNJ increased the processing of these GAA mutants to their mature lysosomal forms, suggesting facilitated trafficking through the secretory pathway. Immunofluorescence microscopy studies showed increased colocalization of GAA with the lysosomal marker LAMP2 after incubation with DNJ, confirming increased lysosomal trafficking. Lastly, a GAA structural model was constructed based on the related eukaryotic glucosidase maltase-glucoamylase. The mutated residues identified in responsive forms of GAA are located throughout most of the structural domains, with half of these residues located in two short regions within the catalytic domain. Taken together, these data support further evaluation of DNJ as a potential treatment for Pompe disease in patients that express responsive forms of GAA.",1 0
"A rare presentation of childhood pompe disease: cardiac involvement provoked by Epstein-Barr virus infection. || Cardiomegaly Diagnosis, Differential Epstein-Barr Virus Infections Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Myocarditis || Myocarditis attributed to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) as the sole cause is a rare manifestation. Myocarditis ascribed to EBV infection in combination with other factors has been reported in a few more cases. We report a child who experienced active EBV infection and later, at 19 months of age, received a diagnosis of Pompe disease (acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency) with predominant cardiac involvement. The cardiac symptoms resolved at the end of the EBV infection. When the patient was recently seen, at 8 years of age, she had an increased left ventricular wall thickness but normal cardiac function. DNA analysis identified this patient as compound heterozygote for a mutant Tyr292Cys and a null allele. In light of genotype-phenotype correlation, it is notable that a Spanish patient with a functionally similar genotype (Tyr292Cys/Arg854Stop) also had childhood Pompe disease with peripheral muscular involvement.",1 0
"Cowden syndrome-affected patients with PTEN promoter mutations demonstrate abnormal protein translation. || 5' Untranslated Regions Base Sequence Binding Sites Breast Neoplasms Case-Control Studies Cell Line, Tumor DNA DNA Primers Female Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple HeLa Cells Humans Luciferases Models, Molecular Nucleic Acid Conformation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Point Mutation Promoter Regions, Genetic Protein Binding Protein Biosynthesis RNA, Messenger Recombinant Proteins Syndrome Transcription Factors Transfection || Germline mutations of PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10) are associated with the multihamartomatous disorder Cowden syndrome (CS). Moreover, patients with CS with germline PTEN promoter mutations have aberrant PTEN protein expression and an increased frequency of breast cancer. Here, we examined the downstream effect of five PTEN promoter variants (-861G/T, -853C/G, -834C/T, -798G/C, and -764G/A) that are not within any known cis-acting regulatory elements. Clinically, all five of these patients have been given diagnoses of breast, thyroid, and/or endometrial cancer. We demonstrated that protein binding to the PTEN promoter (-893 to -755) was not altered in the five variants when compared with the wild-type (WT) promoter. However, reporter assays indicated that three of the variants (-861G/T, -853C/G, and -764G/A) demonstrated an ~50% decrease in luciferase activity compared with the WT construct. PTEN messenger RNA (mRNA) levels were not altered in these variants, whereas secondary structure predictions indicated that different PTEN 5' untranslated region transcript-folding patterns exist in three variants, suggesting an inhibition of protein translation. This was confirmed by PTEN protein analysis. These data indicate that variants causing large mRNA secondary structure alterations result in an inhibition of protein translation and a decrease in PTEN protein expression. These data emphasize the importance of PTEN promoter nucleotide variations and their ability to lead to CS progression by a novel regulatory mechanism. Importantly, these patients have a high prevalence of breast, thyroid, and endometrial malignancies; thus, understanding of the mechanism of PTEN dysfunction in these patients will lead to more-sensitive molecular diagnostic and predictive testing and, ultimately, to rational targeted therapies to treat or prevent malignancy.",3 0
"Germline TP53 mutations result into a constitutive defect of p53 DNA binding and transcriptional response to DNA damage. || Adolescent Adult Aged Case-Control Studies Child Child, Preschool Chromatin Immunoprecipitation DNA DNA Damage Female Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Lymphocytes Male Middle Aged Transcription, Genetic Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) results from heterozygous germline mutations of TP53, encoding a key transcriptional factor activated in response to DNA damage. We have recently shown, from a large LFS series, that dominant-negative missense mutations are the most clinically severe and, thanks to a new p53 functional assay in lymphocytes, that they alter the p53 transcriptional response to DNA damage more drastically than null mutations. In this study, we first confirmed this observation by performing the p53 functional assay in lymphocytes from 56 TP53 mutation carriers harbouring 35 distinct alterations. Then, to compare the impact of the different types of germline TP53 mutations on DNA binding, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-Seq) in lymphocytes exposed to doxorubicin. ChIP-Seq performed in wild-type TP53 control lymphocytes accurately mapped 1287 p53-binding sites. New p53-binding sites were validated using a functional assay in yeast. ChIP-Seq analysis of LFS lymphocytes carrying TP53 null mutations (p.P152Rfs*18 or complete deletion) or the low penetrant 'Brazilian' p.R337H mutation revealed a moderate decrease of p53-binding sites (949, 580 and 620, respectively) and of ChIP-Seq peak depths. In contrast, analysis of LFS lymphocytes with TP53 dominant-negative missense mutations p.R273H or p.R248W revealed only 310 and 143 p53-binding sites, respectively, and the depths of the corresponding peaks were drastically reduced. Altogether, our results show that TP53 mutation carriers exhibit a constitutive defect of the transcriptional response to DNA damage and that the clinical severity of TP53 dominant-negative missense mutations is explained by a massive and global alteration of p53 DNA binding.",3 4 0
"PALB2 sequencing in Italian familial breast cancer cases reveals a high-risk mutation recurrent in the province of Bergamo. || Alleles Breast Neoplasms Case-Control Studies DNA Mutational Analysis European Continental Ancestry Group Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group N Protein Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Humans Italy Mutation Nuclear Proteins Polymorphism, Genetic Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Monoallelic germ-line deleterious mutations of PALB2 (partner and localizer of BRCA2) are associated with breast cancer risk and have been found in several populations, with carrier frequencies of ~1-2%. Initially, these mutations were considered to have moderate penetrance, but accumulating evidence now indicates that they are associated with much higher risk. In this study, we sequenced the PALB2 coding regions unlinked to BRCA (breast cancer) genes in 575 probands from Italian breast cancer families recruited in Milan. We found 12 carriers (2.1%) of deleterious mutations, and none of the mutations was found in 784 controls collected in Milan. One of these mutations, the c.1027C>T (p.Gln343X), was found to be recurrent in the province of Bergamo in northern Italy, being detected in 6/113 (5.3%) familial breast cancer cases and 2/477 (0.4%) controls recruited in this area (Fisher's exact test: P < 0.01). Our data provide confirmatory findings that, in the Italian population also, deleterious mutations of PALB2 are relatively frequent predisposing factors for breast cancer and may be associated with high risk of the disease.",0
"Conformational stability and catalytic activity of PTEN variants linked to cancers and autism spectrum disorders. || Autistic Disorder Genetic Variation Humans Models, Molecular Neoplasms PTEN Phosphohydrolase Protein Conformation Protein Stability Protein Unfolding || Phosphoinositides are membrane components that play critical regulatory roles in mammalian cells. The enzyme PTEN, which catalyzes the dephosphorylation of the phosphoinositide PIP3, is damaged in most sporadic tumors. Mutations in the PTEN gene have also been linked to autism spectrum disorders and other forms of delayed development. Here, human PTEN is shown to be on the cusp of unfolding under physiological conditions. Variants of human PTEN linked to somatic cancers and disorders on the autism spectrum are shown to be impaired in their conformational stability, catalytic activity, or both. Those variants linked only to autism have activity higher than the activity of those linked to cancers. PTEN-L, which is a secreted trans-active isoform, has conformational stability greater than that of the wild-type enzyme. These data indicate that PTEN is a fragile enzyme cast in a crucial role in cellular metabolism and suggest that PTEN-L is a repository for a critical catalytic activity.",0
"Structural and functional effects of disease-causing amino acid substitutions affecting residues Ala72 and Glu76 of the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2. || Alanine Amino Acid Substitution Binding Sites Computer Simulation Crystallography, X-Ray Disease Glutamic Acid Humans Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Models, Molecular Mutation Protein Structure, Tertiary Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Static Electricity || Mutations of the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 are implicated in human diseases, causing Noonan syndrome (NS) and related developmental disorders or contributing to leukemogenesis depending on the specific amino acid substitution involved. SHP-2 is composed by a catalytic (PTP) and two regulatory (N-SH2 and C-SH2) domains that bind to signaling partners and control the enzymatic activity by limiting the accessibility of the catalytic site. Wild type SHP-2 and four disease-associated mutants recurring in hematologic malignancies (Glu76Lys and Ala72Val) or causing NS (Glu76Asp and Ala72Ser), with affected residues located in the PTP-interacting region of the N-SH2 domain, were analyzed by molecular dynamics simulations and in vitro biochemical assays. Simulations demonstrate that mutations do not affect significantly the conformation of the N-SH2 domain. Rather they destabilize the interaction of this domain with the catalytic site, with more evident effects in the two leukemia associated mutants. Consistent with this structural evidence, mutants exhibit an increased level of basal phosphatase activity in the order Glu76Lys > Ala72Val > Glu76Asp > Ala72Ser > WT. The experimental data also show that the mutants with higher basal activity are more responsive to an activating phosphopeptide. A thermodynamic analysis demonstrates that an increase in the overall phosphopeptide affinity of mutants can be explained by a shift in the equilibrium between the inactive and active SHP-2 structure. These data support the view that an increase in the affinity of SHP-2 for its binding partners, caused by destabilization of the closed, inactive conformation, rather than protein basal activation per se, would represent the molecular mechanism, leading to pathogenesis in these mutants.",0
"Screening for pharmacological chaperones in Fabry disease. || Biological Assay Cells, Cultured Drug Design Fabry Disease Humans Leukocytes, Mononuclear Male Molecular Chaperones T-Lymphocytes alpha-Galactosidase || As a prerequisite for clinical trials of pharmacological chaperone therapy (PCT) for Fabry disease, we developed a rapid screening assay for enhancement of endogenous alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A) in patient-derived cells. We used a T-cell based system to screen 11 mutations causing Fabry disease for enhanceability using 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin (DGJ). When patient-derived T-cells were grown in the presence of DGJ, alpha-Gal A activity increased to more than 50% of normal in several mutations but was unaffected in others. In addition to the mutation R301Q, reported previously, A97V, R112H, R112C, A143T, and L300P were enhanceable, but R356W, G132R, A143P, R220X, and 30delG were not. The level of alpha-Gal A activity achieved provides a basis for the therapeutic trial of DGJ in patients with similarly enhanceable enzyme. This assay method has general utility in other disorders in assessing the degree of enhancement of activity of mutated proteins by PCT.",4 0
"The E1784K mutation in SCN5A is associated with mixed clinical phenotype of type 3 long QT syndrome. || Adolescent Adult Anti-Arrhythmia Agents Biophysics Child DNA Mutational Analysis Electrocardiography Female Flecainide Humans Long QT Syndrome Male Muscle Proteins Mutation NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Phenotype Sodium Channels || Phenotypic overlap of type 3 long QT syndrome (LQT3) with Brugada syndrome (BrS) is observed in some carriers of mutations in the Na channel SCN5A. While this overlap is important for patient management, the clinical features, prevalence, and mechanisms underlying such overlap have not been fully elucidated. To investigate the basis for this overlap, we genotyped a cohort of 44 LQT3 families of multiple ethnicities from 7 referral centers and found a high prevalence of the E1784K mutation in SCN5A. Of 41 E1784K carriers, 93% had LQT3, 22% had BrS, and 39% had sinus node dysfunction. Heterologously expressed E1784K channels showed a 15.0-mV negative shift in the voltage dependence of Na channel inactivation and a 7.5-fold increase in flecainide affinity for resting-state channels, properties also seen with other LQT3 mutations associated with a mixed clinical phenotype. Furthermore, these properties were absent in Na channels harboring the T1304M mutation, which is associated with LQT3 without a mixed clinical phenotype. These results suggest that a negative shift of steady-state Na channel inactivation and enhanced tonic block by class IC drugs represent common biophysical mechanisms underlying the phenotypic overlap of LQT3 and BrS and further indicate that class IC drugs should be avoided in patients with Na channels displaying these behaviors.",0
"Mapping pathogenic mutations suggests an innovative structural model for the pendrin (SLC26A4) transmembrane domain. || Amino Acid Motifs Amino Acid Sequence Genetic Predisposition to Disease Goiter, Nodular Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Hydrophobic and Hydrophilic Interactions Membrane Proteins Membrane Transport Proteins Models, Molecular Mutation Protein Domains Protein Structure, Secondary Sequence Homology, Amino Acid Sulfate Transporters Vestibular Aqueduct || Human pendrin (SLC26A4) is an anion transporter mostly expressed in the inner ear, thyroid and kidney. SLC26A4 gene mutations are associated with a broad phenotypic spectrum, including Pendred Syndrome and non-syndromic hearing loss with enlarged vestibular aqueduct (ns-EVA). No experimental structure of pendrin is currently available, making phenotype-genotype correlations difficult as predictions of transmembrane (TM) segments vary in number. Here, we propose a novel three-dimensional (3D) pendrin transmembrane domain model based on the SLC26Dg transporter. The resulting 14 TM topology was found to include two non-canonical transmembrane segments crucial for pendrin activity. Mutation mapping of 147 clinically validated pathological mutations shows that most affect two previously undescribed TM regions.",0
"Aberrant splicing of phenylalanine hydroxylase mRNA: the major cause for phenylketonuria in parts of southern Europe. || Base Sequence Cell Line DNA Mutational Analysis Europe European Continental Ancestry Group Haplotypes Humans Introns Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction RNA Splicing Reading Frames Transfection || We report a mutation within the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene that causes aberrant splicing of the mRNA and that is in tight association with chromosomal haplotypes 6, 10, and 36. Because of the high frequency of these particular haplotypes in Bulgaria, Italy, and Turkey, it appears to be one of the more frequent defects in the PAH gene causing classical phenylketonuria in this part of Europe. The mutation is a G to A transition at position 546 in intron 10 of the PAH gene, 11 bp upstream from the intron 10/exon 11 boundary. It activates a cryptic splice site and results in an in-frame insertion of 9 nucleotides between exon 10 and exon 11 of the processed mRNA. Normal amounts of liver PAH protein are present in homozygous patients, but no catalytic activity can be detected. This loss of enzyme activity is probably caused by conformational changes resulting from the insertion of three additional amino acids (Gly-Leu-Gln) between the normal sequences encoded by exon 10 and exon 11.",0
"Deamidations in recombinant human phenylalanine hydroxylase. Identification of labile asparagine residues and functional characterization of Asn --> Asp mutant forms. || Amides Amino Acid Sequence Asparagine Aspartic Acid Catalytic Domain Enzyme Stability Humans Kinetics Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Recombinant Proteins Spectrometry, Mass, Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption-Ionization || Recombinant human phenylalanine hydroxylase (hPAH) expressed in Escherichia coli for 24 h at 28 degrees C has been found by two-dimensional electrophoresis to exist as a mixture of four to five molecular forms as a result of nonenzymatic deamidation of labile Asn residues. The multiple deamidations alter the functional properties of the enzyme including its affinity for l-phenylalanine and tetrahydrobiopterin, catalytic efficiency, and substrate inhibition and also result in enzyme forms more susceptible to limited tryptic proteolysis. Asn(32) in the regulatory domain deamidates very rapidly because of its nearest neighbor amino acid Gly(33) (Solstad, T., Carvalho, R. N., Andersen, O. A., Waidelich, D., and Flatmark, T. (2003) Eur. J. Biochem., in press). Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight-mass spectrometry of the tryptic peptides in the catalytic domain of a 24-h (28 degrees C) expressed enzyme has shown Asn(376) and Asn(133) to be labile residues. Site-directed mutagenesis of nine Asn residues revealed that the deamidations of Asn(32) and Asn(376) are the main determinants for the functional and regulatory differences observed between the 2- and 24-h-induced wild-type (wt) enzyme. The Asn(32) --> Asp, Asn(376) --> Asp, and the double mutant forms expressed for 2 h at 28 degrees C revealed qualitatively similar regulatory properties as the highly deamidated 24-h expressed wt-hPAH. Moreover, deamidation of Asn(32) in the wt-hPAH (24 h expression at 28 degrees C) and the Asn(32) --> Asp mutation both increase the initial rate of phosphorylation of Ser(16) by cAMP-dependent protein kinase (p < 0.005). By contrast, the substitution of Gly(33) with Ala or Val, both preventing the deamidation of Asn(32), resulted in enzyme forms that were phosphorylated at a similar rate as nondeamidated wt-hPAH, even on 24-h expression. The other Asn --> Asp substitutions (in the catalytic domain) revealed that Asn(207) and Asn(223) have an important stabilizing structural function. Finally, two recently reported phenylketonuria mutations at Asn residues in the catalytic domain were studied, i.e. Asn(167) --> Ile and Asn(207) --> Asp, and their phenotypes were characterized.",0
"A mutant form of PTEN linked to autism. || Amino Acid Substitution Autistic Disorder Cell Line, Tumor Cell Membrane Green Fluorescent Proteins Humans Membrane Lipids Microscopy, Confocal Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-Diphosphate Phosphatidylinositols Phosphatidylserines Protein Binding Recombinant Fusion Proteins Spectrophotometry, Infrared Tumor Suppressor Proteins || The tumor suppressor, phosphatase, and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN), is a phosphoinositide (PI) phosphatase specific for the 3-position of the inositol ring. PTEN has been implicated in autism for a subset of patients with macrocephaly. Various studies identified patients in this subclass with one normal and one mutated PTEN gene. We characterize the binding, structural properties, activity, and subcellular localization of one of these autism-related mutants, H93R PTEN. Even though this mutation is located at the phosphatase active site, we find that it affects the functions of neighboring domains. H93R PTEN binding to phosphatidylserine-bearing model membranes is 5.6-fold enhanced in comparison to wild-type PTEN. In contrast, we find that binding to phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P(2)) model membranes is 2.5-fold decreased for the mutant PTEN in comparison to wild-type PTEN. The structural change previously found for wild-type PTEN upon interaction with PI(4,5)P(2), is absent for H93R PTEN. Consistent with the increased binding to phosphatidylserine, we find enhanced plasma membrane association of PTEN-GFP in U87MG cells. However, this enhanced plasma membrane association does not translate into increased PI(3,4,5)P(3) turnover, since in vivo studies show a reduced activity of the H93R PTEN-GFP mutant. Because the interaction of PI(4,5)P(2) with PTEN's N-terminal domain is diminished by this mutation, we hypothesize that the interaction of PTEN's N-terminal domain with the phosphatase domain is impacted by the H93R mutation, preventing PI(4,5)P(2) from inducing the conformational change that activates phosphatase activity.",0
"Systematic Functional Interrogation of Rare Cancer Variants Identifies Oncogenic Alleles. || Alleles Animals Cell Line, Tumor Cell Transformation, Neoplastic Disease Models, Animal Gene Expression Profiling Genetic Association Studies Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Variation Heterografts High-Throughput Screening Assays Humans Male Mice Neoplasms Oncogenes Reproducibility of Results || Cancer genome characterization efforts now provide an initial view of the somatic alterations in primary tumors. However, most point mutations occur at low frequency, and the function of these alleles remains undefined. We have developed a scalable systematic approach to interrogate the function of cancer-associated gene variants. We subjected 474 mutant alleles curated from 5,338 tumors to pooled in vivo tumor formation assays and gene expression profiling. We identified 12 transforming alleles, including two in genes (PIK3CB, POT1) that have not been shown to be tumorigenic. One rare KRAS allele, D33E, displayed tumorigenicity and constitutive activation of known RAS effector pathways. By comparing gene expression changes induced upon expression of wild-type and mutant alleles, we inferred the activity of specific alleles. Because alleles found to be mutated only once in 5,338 tumors rendered cells tumorigenic, these observations underscore the value of integrating genomic information with functional studies. Experimentally inferring the functional status of cancer-associated mutations facilitates the interpretation of genomic information in cancer. Pooled in vivo screen and gene expression profiling identified functional variants and demonstrated that expression of rare variants induced tumorigenesis. Variant phenotyping through functional studies will facilitate defining key somatic events in cancer. Cancer Discov; 6(7); 714-26. ©2016 AACR.See related commentary by Cho and Collisson, p. 694This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 681.",0
"A pharmacogenetic approach to identify mutant forms of α-galactosidase A that respond to a pharmacological chaperone for Fabry disease. || 1-Deoxynojirimycin Biological Assay Enzyme Activation Fabry Disease Gene Expression Regulation HEK293 Cells Humans Leukocytes, Mononuclear Male Mutant Proteins Point Mutation Protein Conformation alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is caused by mutations in the gene (GLA) that encodes α-galactosidase A (α-Gal A). The iminosugar AT1001 (GR181413A, migalastat hydrochloride, 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin) is a pharmacological chaperone that selectively binds and stabilizes α-Gal A, increasing total cellular levels and activity for some mutant forms (defined as ""responsive""). In this study, we developed a cell-based assay in cultured HEK-293 cells to identify mutant forms of α-Gal A that are responsive to AT1001. Concentration-dependent increases in α-Gal A activity in response to AT1001 were shown for 49 (60%) of 81 mutant forms. The responses of α-Gal A mutant forms were generally consistent with the responses observed in male Fabry patient-derived lymphoblasts. Importantly, the HEK-293 cell responses of 19 α-Gal A mutant forms to a clinically achievable concentration of AT1001 (10 µM) were generally consistent with observed increases in α-Gal A activity in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from male Fabry patients orally administered AT1001 during Phase 2 clinical studies. This indicates that the cell-based responses can identify mutant forms of α-Gal A that are likely to respond to AT1001 in vivo. Thus, the HEK-293 cell-based assay may be a useful aid in the identification of Fabry patients with AT1001-responsive mutant forms.",4 0
"Hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy mutations differentially affect the molecular force generation of mouse alpha-cardiac myosin in the laser trap assay. || Animals Cardiomyopathy, Dilated Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Mice Mice, Inbred C57BL Molecular Motor Proteins Mutation Myocardial Contraction Optical Tweezers Stress, Mechanical Structure-Activity Relationship Ventricular Myosins || Point mutations in cardiac myosin, the heart's molecular motor, produce distinct clinical phenotypes: hypertrophic (HCM) and dilated (DCM) cardiomyopathy. Do mutations alter myosin's molecular mechanics in a manner that is predictive of the clinical outcome? We have directly characterized the maximal force-generating capacity (F(max)) of two HCM (R403Q, R453C) and two DCM (S532P, F764L) mutant myosins isolated from homozygous mouse models using a novel load-clamped laser trap assay. F(max) was 50% (R403Q) and 80% (R453C) greater for the HCM mutants compared with the wild type, whereas F(max) was severely depressed for one of the DCM mutants (65% S532P). Although F(max) was normal for the F764L DCM mutant, its actin-activated ATPase activity and actin filament velocity (V(actin)) in a motility assay were significantly reduced (Schmitt JP, Debold EP, Ahmad F, Armstrong A, Frederico A, Conner DA, Mende U, Lohse MJ, Warshaw D, Seidman CE, Seidman JG. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103: 14525-14530, 2006.). These F(max) data combined with previous V(actin) measurements suggest that HCM and DCM result from alterations to one or more of myosin's fundamental mechanical properties, with HCM-causing mutations leading to enhanced but DCM-causing mutations leading to depressed function. These mutation-specific changes in mechanical properties must initiate distinct signaling cascades that ultimately lead to the disparate phenotypic responses observed in HCM and DCM.",0
"PTEN coordinates G(1) arrest by down-regulating cyclin D1 via its protein phosphatase activity and up-regulating p27 via its lipid phosphatase activity in a breast cancer model. || Amino Acid Substitution Breast Neoplasms Cyclin D1 Down-Regulation Drug Interactions Estrogens G1 Phase Gene Expression Regulation Humans Insulin Microfilament Proteins Muscle Proteins PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphatidate Phosphatase Phosphoprotein Phosphatases Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Tumor Cells, Cultured Tumor Suppressor Proteins Up-Regulation || The tumour suppressor gene PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 encodes a dual-specificity phosphatase that recognizes phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate and protein substrates. We have shown previously that over-expression of PTEN in a tetracycline-controlled inducible system blocks cell cycle progression and induces apoptosis in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Here, we demonstrate that over-expression of wild-type PTEN leads to the suppression of cell growth through the blockade of cell cycle progression, an increase in the abundance of p27, a decrease in the protein levels of cyclin D1 and the inhibition of Akt phosphorylation. In contrast, expression of the phosphatase-dead mutant, C124S, promotes cell growth and has the opposite effect on the abundance of p27, cyclin D1 levels and the phosphorylation of Akt. The G129E mutant, which does not have lipid phosphatase activity but retains protein phosphatase activity, behaves like C124S except that the former causes decreases in cyclin D1 levels similar to wild-type PTEN. Therefore, PTEN exerts its growth suppression through lipid phosphatase-dependent and independent activities and most likely, via the coordinate effect of both protein phosphatase and lipid phosphatase activities. Addition of either estrogen or insulin abrogates PTEN-mediated up-regulation of p27 and partially blocks PTEN-mediated growth suppression, whereas the combination of estrogen and insulin eliminates the alterations of p27 and cyclin D1 and completely blocks PTEN-mediated growth suppression. Our findings demonstrate that PTEN blocks cell cycle progression differentially through down-regulating the positive cell cycle regulator, cyclin D1, by its protein phosphatase activity, and up-regulating the negative cell cycle regulator, p27, by its lipid phosphatase activity.",0
"The pharmacological chaperone AT2220 increases the specific activity and lysosomal delivery of mutant acid alpha-glucosidase, and promotes glycogen reduction in a transgenic mouse model of Pompe disease. || 1-Deoxynojirimycin Administration, Oral Animals Biocatalysis Biological Availability COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops Disease Models, Animal Endoplasmic Reticulum Enzyme Stability Gene Knockout Techniques Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Isoenzymes Lysosomes Mice Mice, Transgenic Mutant Proteins Mutation Protein Transport Proteolysis || Pompe disease is an inherited lysosomal storage disorder that results from a deficiency in acid α-glucosidase (GAA) activity due to mutations in the GAA gene. Pompe disease is characterized by accumulation of lysosomal glycogen primarily in heart and skeletal muscles, which leads to progressive muscle weakness. We have shown previously that the small molecule pharmacological chaperone AT2220 (1-deoxynojirimycin hydrochloride, duvoglustat hydrochloride) binds and stabilizes wild-type as well as multiple mutant forms of GAA, and can lead to higher cellular levels of GAA. In this study, we examined the effect of AT2220 on mutant GAA, in vitro and in vivo, with a primary focus on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-retained P545L mutant form of human GAA (P545L GAA). AT2220 increased the specific activity of P545L GAA toward both natural (glycogen) and artificial substrates in vitro. Incubation with AT2220 also increased the ER export, lysosomal delivery, proteolytic processing, and stability of P545L GAA. In a new transgenic mouse model of Pompe disease that expresses human P545L on a Gaa knockout background (Tg/KO) and is characterized by reduced GAA activity and elevated glycogen levels in disease-relevant tissues, daily oral administration of AT2220 for 4 weeks resulted in significant and dose-dependent increases in mature lysosomal GAA isoforms and GAA activity in heart and skeletal muscles. Importantly, oral administration of AT2220 also resulted in significant glycogen reduction in disease-relevant tissues. Compared to daily administration, less-frequent AT2220 administration, including repeated cycles of 4 or 5 days with AT2220 followed by 3 or 2 days without drug, respectively, resulted in even greater glycogen reductions. Collectively, these data indicate that AT2220 increases the specific activity, trafficking, and lysosomal stability of P545L GAA, leads to increased levels of mature GAA in lysosomes, and promotes glycogen reduction in situ. As such, AT2220 may warrant further evaluation as a treatment for Pompe disease.",0
"Diverse PAH transcripts in lymphocytes of PKU patients with putative nonsense (G272X, Y356X) and missense (P281L, R408Q) mutations. || Cells, Cultured Homozygote Humans Lymphocytes Mutation Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias RNA Splicing RNA, Messenger Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Transcription, Genetic || The majority of mutations in the human phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene that lead to the recessive disease phenylketonuria (PKU) are believed to affect the activity or stability of the PAH enzyme. In this study we have performed in vivo analyses of lymphocyte PAH mRNA from PKU patients homozygous for the PKU missense mutations P281L and R408Q as well as the nonsense mutations G272X and Y356X. The mutations G272X, P281L and R408Q, which are located outside the consensus splice site sequence, result in transcripts with one or more exons skipped in addition to full-length transcripts. The mutation Y356X results in transcripts with one or more exons skipped, but no full-length transcripts. Our findings question the value of functional and structural predictions of mutations at the protein level without analyses of the corresponding transcript.",3 0
"Molecular epidemiology and genotype-phenotype correlation in phenylketonuria patients from South Spain. || Adolescent Alleles Child Child, Preschool Female Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Male Molecular Epidemiology Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Spain || The aim of this study was to identify the most common genotypes in the phenylketonuria (PKU) population of Andalusia, assessing the correlation with the phenotype and the usefulness in predicting the response to treatment with tetrahydrobiopterin. We conducted a retrospective observational study between January 1980 and January 2010 in 147 Andalusian PKU patients assessing phenotype, genotype and response to a 24-h BH4 loading test. Our cohort of patients exhibited 65 different mutations, 69.2% corresponding to the missense type, in a total of 123 different genotypes. IVS10nt-11g>a was the most common mutation (10.9%). Four novel missense mutations were identified: p.L258P; p.E66K, p.R155C and p.P122S. Although generally there is a good genotype-phenotype correlation, for eight of the repeated genotypes a slightly different phenotype was observed. In 96 PKU subjects BH4 challenge was carried out. Patients with previously reported unresponsive mutations on both alleles showed a negative response, while 95.5% (28/29) of the responsive patients carry at least one missense mutation previously associated to the BH4. Our data reveal a great genetic heterogeneity in the Andalusian population. Genotype is quite a good predictor of the phenotype and of the responsiveness to tetrahydrobiopterin, which is relevant for patient management and follow-up.",3 1 0
"COOH-terminal truncated cardiac myosin-binding protein C mutants resulting from familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mutations exhibit altered expression and/or incorporation in fetal rat cardiomyocytes. || Amino Acid Motifs Amino Acid Sequence Animals Binding Sites COS Cells Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Cells, Cultured Connectin Gene Expression Heart Humans Molecular Sequence Data Muscle Proteins Mutation Myocardium Myosins Rats Rats, Wistar Recombinant Proteins Sarcomeres Sequence Analysis, Protein || Mutations in human cardiac myosin-binding protein C (cMyBP-C) gene are associated with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC), and most of them are predicted to produce COOH-truncated proteins. To understand the molecular mechanism(s) by which such mutations cause FHC, we analyzed (i) the accumulation of human cMyBP-C mutants in fetal rat cardiomyocytes, and (ii) the protein sequence of the human wild-type (wt) cMyBP-C by hydrophobic cluster analysis with the aim of identifying new putative myosin-binding site(s). Accumulation and sarcomeric localization of the wt protein and of four FHC-mutant cMyBP-Cs (E542Q and three COOH-truncated proteins) were studied in cardiomyocytes by immunostaining and confocal microscopy after transfection with myc-tagged constructs. We found that: (i) 10 % of the cells expressing COOH-truncated mutants exhibit an incorporation into the A-band of the sarcomere without any alteration of the myofibrillar architecture versus 76 % of those expressing the wt or E542Q mutant cMyBP-Cs (p<0.001); (ii) 90 % of the cells expressing the truncated mutants show a diffuse localization of these proteins in the cardiomyocytes, out of which 45 % exhibit a significant alteration of the sarcomeric structure (p<0.0001 versus wt); and (iii) the two shortest mutant cMyBP-Cs accumulate at very low levels in fetal rat cardiomyocytes as compared to the wt (p<0.008). Protein sequence analysis indicated that a 45-residue sequence in the NH2-terminal C0 domain of cMyBP-C exhibits a consistent homology (sequence similarity score of 42 %) with a segment of the NH2-terminal domain of myomesin, another myosin-binding protein. This result suggests that the C0 domain of human cMyBP-C contains a novel putative myosin-binding site that could account for the A-band incorporation of the truncated mutants. In addition, the faint accumulation and the diffuse localization of truncated mutants could probably be explained by a low affinity of the C0 domain for myosin. We conclude that COOH-truncated cMyBP-Cs may act as poison polypeptides that disrupt the myofibrillar architecture and result in the defects observed in FHC.",0
"Point mutations in TOR confer Rheb-independent growth in fission yeast and nutrient-independent mammalian TOR signaling in mammalian cells. || Amino Acid Sequence Dimerization GTP Phosphohydrolases Humans Immunoprecipitation Molecular Sequence Data Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases Point Mutation Protein Kinases Protein Structure, Tertiary Schizosaccharomyces Schizosaccharomyces pombe Proteins Signal Transduction Species Specificity TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases || Rheb is a unique member of the Ras superfamily GTP-binding proteins. We as well as others previously have shown that Rheb is a critical component of the TSC/TOR signaling pathway. In fission yeast, Rheb is encoded by the rhb1 gene. Rhb1p is essential for growth and directly interacts with Tor2p. In this article, we report identification of 22 single amino acid changes in the Tor2 protein that enable growth in the absence of Rhb1p. These mutants also exhibit decreased mating efficiency. Interestingly, the mutations are located in the C-terminal half of the Tor2 protein, clustering mainly within the FAT and kinase domains. We noted some differences in the effect of a mutation in the FAT domain (L1310P) and in the kinase domain (E2221K) on growth and mating. Although the Tor2p mutations bypass Rhb1p's requirement for growth, they are incapable of suppressing Rhb1p's requirement for resistance to stress and toxic amino acids, pointing to multiple functions of Rhb1p. In mammalian systems, we find that mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) carrying analogous mutations (L1460P or E2419K), although sensitive to rapamycin, exhibits constitutive activation even when the cells are starved for nutrients. These mutations do not show significant difference in their ability to form complexes with Raptor, Rictor, or mLST8. Furthermore, we present evidence that mutant mTOR can complex with wild-type mTOR and that this heterodimer is active in nutrient-starved cells.",0
"Molecular genetics of phenylketonuria in Mediterranean countries: a mutation associated with partial phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Blotting, Northern Gene Amplification Gene Frequency Haplotypes Humans Mutation Oligonucleotide Probes Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length || We report the characterization of a mutation in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene associated with partial residual activity of the enzyme. This point mutation (280glu----lys) was found by sequencing a mutant cDNA clone derived from a needle biopsy of the liver in a child with variant form of phenylketonuria. There is a strict concordance between homozygosity for the mutation and this particular phenotype. The (280glu----lys) mutation is linked to an original and rare RFLP haplotype at the PAH locus found in south Europe and North Africa. So far, this genotype-haplotype association is both inclusive and exclusive. Thirty-three PAH-deficient patients were screened for the mutation by using polymerase chain-reaction amplification of their genomic DNA extracted from Guthrie cards. Since a large number of patients can be screened for a particular mutation by using Guthrie cards, the possibility arises of using these samples collected by national newborn screening centers for prospective and retrospective detection of other mutations in the human genome.",3 0
"Structure/function analysis of the domains required for the multimerisation of phenylalanine hydroxylase. || Amino Acid Sequence Animals Dimerization Humans Kinetics Leucine Zippers Molecular Sequence Data Molecular Weight Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Protein Conformation Protein Structure, Secondary Rats Recombinant Fusion Proteins Sequence Analysis, DNA Sequence Deletion Sequence Homology, Amino Acid Structure-Activity Relationship || Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) exists as an equilibrium of dimers and tetramers. However, there is little information concerning the inter- or intra-molecular interactions required for enzyme quaternary structure. It is predicted that the formation of a PAH tetramer will require at least two points of contact per enzyme subunit. Sequence analysis has suggested the existence of a C-terminal domain with characteristics of a leucine zipper or a variant of this called a coiled-coil. By deletion of 24 amino acids from the C-terminus or conversion of leucine 448 to an alanine residue, we have shown that this putative leucine zipper/coiled-coil domain is involved in the assembly of an active enzyme tetramer from dimers. The removal of this C-terminal domain of PAH reduces enzyme activity but does not abolish it. Furthermore, we report that an alanine 447 to aspartate mutation associated with phenylketonuria may affect subunit assembly which suggests the formation of enzyme tetramers is physiologically relevant. Our analysis of subunit interactions in vivo, show that in the absence of the C-terminal coiled-coil domain, dimers can form and this is only possible when the N-terminal domain is present. This provides the first evidence that N-terminal domain is required for multimerisation. We propose that the N-terminal regulatory domain in conjunction with the C-terminal coiled-coil domain, mediates the formation of fully active enzyme tetramers.",0
"Identification of three novel missense PKU mutations among Chinese. || Alleles Amino Acid Sequence Asian Continental Ancestry Group Base Sequence China Codon DNA Mutational Analysis Humans Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Three novel missense mutations have been identified in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genes of Chinese individuals afflicted with various degrees of phenylketonuria (PKU). A T-to-C transition was observed in exon 5 of the gene, resulting in the substitution of Phe161 by Ser161. Two substitutions, G-to-T and T-to-G, were observed in exon 7, resulting in the substitution of Gly247 by Val247 and Leu255 by Val255, respectively. Expression analysis demonstrated that these mutant proteins produced between 0 and 15% of normal PAH enzyme activity. Population screening of a Chinese sample population indicates that these mutations are quite rare, together accounting for only about 4% of all PKU alleles among the Chinese. The P161S and G247V mutations were each present on a single PAH RFLP haplotype 4 chromosome in patients form Northern China, while the L255V mutation was present on chromosomes of both haplotypes 18 and 21 in patients from Southern China. These results suggest that the remaining 30% of uncharacterized PKU alleles in the Chinese population may bear a large number of relatively rare PAH mutations.",3 1 0
"The importance of an integrated analysis of clinical, molecular, and functional data for the genetic diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia. || Adult Cardiovascular Diseases Cholesterol, LDL Female Genotype Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Portugal Risk Factors || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is one of the most common monogenic disorders, and the high concentrations of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol presented since birth confers on these patients an increased cardiovascular risk. More than 1,600 alterations have been described in the LDL receptor gene (LDLR), but a large number need to be validated as mutations causing disease to establish a diagnosis of FH. This study aims to characterize, both at the phenotypic and genotypic levels, families with a clinical diagnosis of FH and present evidence for the importance of the integration of clinical, molecular, and functional data for the correct diagnosis of patients with FH. A detailed analysis of the phenotype and genotype presented by 55 families with 13 different alterations in the LDLR was conducted. For eight of these, an extensive functional characterization was performed by flow cytometry, confocal microscopy, and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Carriers of neutral alterations presented a significantly lower incidence of premature cardiovascular disease, lower levels of atherogenic lipoproteins and a large number of these individuals had LDL-cholesterol values below the 75(th) percentile. presented a significantly lower incidence of premature cardiovascular disease, lower levels of atherogenic lipoproteins and a large number of these individuals had LDL-cholesterol values below the 75th percentile However, the functional study was essential to determine the pathogenicity of variants. The data collected illustrate the importance of this integrated analysis for the correct assessment of patients with FH who can otherwise be misdiagnosed.",2 4 0
"Nuclear Excluded Autism-Associated Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog Mutations Dysregulate Neuronal Growth. ||  || Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) negatively regulates downstream protein kinase B signaling, resulting in decreased cellular growth and proliferation. PTEN is mutated in a subset of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD); however, the mechanism by which specific point mutations alter PTEN function is largely unknown. Here, we assessed how ASD-associated single-nucleotide variations in PTEN (ASD-PTEN) affect function. We used viral-mediated molecular substitution of human PTEN into Pten knockout mouse neurons and assessed neuronal morphology to determine the functional impact of ASD-PTEN. We employed molecular cloning to examine how PTEN's stability, subcellular localization, and catalytic activity affect neuronal growth. We identified a set of ASD-PTEN mutations displaying altered lipid phosphatase function and subcellular localization. We demonstrated that wild-type PTEN can rescue the neuronal hypertrophy, while PTEN H93R, F241S, D252G, W274L, N276S, and D326N failed to rescue this hypertrophy. A subset of these mutations lacked nuclear localization, prompting us to examine the role of nuclear PTEN in regulating neuronal growth. We found that nuclear PTEN alone is sufficient to regulate soma size. Furthermore, forced localization of the D252G and W274L mutations into the nucleus partially restores regulation of soma size. ASD-PTEN mutations display decreased stability, catalytic activity, and/or altered subcellular localization. Mutations lacking nuclear localization uncover a novel mechanism whereby lipid phosphatase activity in the nucleus can regulate mammalian target of rapamycin signaling and neuronal growth.",0
"Correlation between genotype and phenotype in patients with bi-allelic SLC26A4 mutations. || Deafness Gene Frequency Genotype HEK293 Cells Humans Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Phenotype Republic of Korea Sulfate Transporters Vestibular Aqueduct || Mutation of SLC26A4 is the most common cause of prelingual hearing loss in East Asia. Patients with SLC26A4 mutations have variable phenotypes ranging from non-syndromic hearing loss to Pendred syndrome. Here, we analyzed the correlation between genotype and various inner ear phenotypes and found a possible underlying mechanism. This study included 111 patients with bi-allelic SLC26A4 mutations who had bilateral enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA) and hearing loss. p.H723R (61%), c.919-2A>G (24%), and p.T410M (4%) were the most common mutations in Korean patients with EVAs. Residual hearing in patients with c.919-2A>G or p.T410M mutations was better than that of patients with p.H723R homozygous mutations. Interestingly, quantitative polymerase chain reaction showed normal pendrin transcript (6-17% of normal levels) was produced from patients with c.919-2A>G homozygous mutations. Surface expression ratio of pendrin and residual anion exchange activity were higher in cells transfected with p.T410M in comparison to cells transfected with p.H723R. These results suggest that there is a correlation between degree of residual hearing and the SLC26A4 genotype commonly found in the East Asian population.",1 0
"Letter to the Editors: Concerning ""Divergent clinical outcomes of alphaglucosidase enzyme replacement therapy in two siblings with infantile-onset Pompe disease treated in the symptomatic or pre-symptomatic state"" by Takashi M et al. ||  || ",1 0
"Structure of human lysosomal acid α-glucosidase-a guide for the treatment of Pompe disease. || Acetylcysteine Catalytic Domain Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Lysosomes Models, Molecular Protein Conformation alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease, a rare lysosomal storage disease caused by deficiency of the lysosomal acid α-glucosidase (GAA), is characterized by glycogen accumulation, triggering severe secondary cellular damage and resulting in progressive motor handicap and premature death. Numerous disease-causing mutations in the gaa gene have been reported, but the structural effects of the pathological variants were unknown. Here we present the high-resolution crystal structures of recombinant human GAA (rhGAA), the standard care of Pompe disease. These structures portray the unbound form of rhGAA and complexes thereof with active site-directed inhibitors, providing insight into substrate recognition and the molecular framework for the rationalization of the deleterious effects of disease-causing mutations. Furthermore, we report the structure of rhGAA in complex with the allosteric pharmacological chaperone N-acetylcysteine, which reveals the stabilizing function of this chaperone at the structural level.",0
"NMR-based functional profiling of RASopathies and oncogenic RAS mutations. || Amino Acid Substitution Cell Line, Tumor Enzyme Activation HEK293 Cells Humans Mutation, Missense Neoplasms Neurofibromatosis 1 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, Biomolecular Oncogene Protein p21(ras) Signal Transduction || Defects in the RAS small G protein or its associated network of regulatory proteins that disrupt GTPase cycling are a major cause of cancer and developmental RASopathy disorders. Lack of robust functional assays has been a major hurdle in RAS pathway-targeted drug development. We used NMR to obtain detailed mechanistic data on RAS cycling defects conferred by oncogenic mutations, or full-length RASopathy-derived regulatory proteins. By monitoring the conformation of wild-type and oncogenic RAS in real-time, we show that opposing properties integrate with regulators to hyperactivate oncogenic RAS mutants. Q61L and G13D exhibited rapid nucleotide exchange and an unexpected susceptibility to GAP-mediated hydrolysis, in direct contrast with G12V, indicating different approaches must be taken to inhibit these oncoproteins. An NMR methodology was established to directly monitor RAS cycling by intact, multidomain proteins encoded by RASopathy genes in mammalian cell extracts. By measuring GAP activity from tumor cells, we demonstrate how loss of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) increases RAS-GTP levels in NF1-derived cells. We further applied this methodology to profile Noonan Syndrome (NS)-derived SOS1 mutants. Combining NMR with cell-based assays allowed us to differentiate defects in catalysis, allosteric regulation, and membrane targeting of individual mutants, while revealing a membrane-dependent compensatory effect that attenuates dramatic increases in RAS activation shown by Y337C, L550P, and I252T. Our NMR method presents a precise and robust measure of RAS activity, providing mechanistic insights that facilitate discovery of therapeutics targeted against the RAS signaling network.",4 0
"Twenty-two novel mutations in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) underscore the genotype-phenotype correlation in glycogen storage disease type II. ||  || Patients with glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII, Pompe disease) suffer from progressive muscle weakness due to acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency. The disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait with a spectrum of clinical phenotypes. We have investigated 29 cases of GSDII and thereby identified 55 pathogenic mutations of the acid alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) encoding acid maltase. There were 34 different mutations identified, 22 of which were novel. All of the missense mutations and two other mutations with an unpredictable effect on acid alpha-glucosidase synthesis and function were transiently expressed in COS cells. The effect of a novel splice-site mutation was investigated by real-time PCR analysis. The outcome of our analysis underscores the notion that the clinical phenotype of GSDII is largely dictated by the nature of the mutations in the GAA alleles. This genotype-phenotype correlation makes DNA analysis a valuable tool to help predict the clinical course of the disease.",2 1 4 0 3
"Compound heterozygous mutations in the SUR1 (ABCC 8) subunit of pancreatic K(ATP) channels cause neonatal diabetes by perturbing the coupling between Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Adenosine Triphosphate Animals COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops Diabetic Ketoacidosis Heterozygote Humans Infant KATP Channels Male Mutation Patch-Clamp Techniques Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Protein Multimerization Receptors, Drug Sulfonylurea Compounds Sulfonylurea Receptors || KATP channels regulate insulin secretion by coupling β-cell metabolism to membrane excitability. These channels are comprised of a pore-forming Kir6.2 tetramer which is enveloped by four regulatory SUR1 subunits. ATP acts on Kir6.2 to stabilize the channel closed state while ADP (coordinated with Mg(2+)) activates channels via the SUR1 domains. Aberrations in nucleotide-binding or in coupling binding to gating can lead to hyperinsulinism or diabetes. Here, we report a case of diabetes in a 7-mo old child with compound heterozygous mutations in ABCC8 (SUR1[A30V] and SUR1[G296R]). In unison, these mutations lead to a gain of KATP channel function, which will attenuate the β-cell response to increased metabolism and will thereby decrease insulin secretion. (86)Rb(+) flux assays on COSm6 cells coexpressing the mutant subunits (to recapitulate the compound heterozygous state) show a 2-fold increase in basal rate of (86)Rb(+) efflux relative to WT channels. Experiments on excised inside-out patches also reveal a slight increase in activity, manifested as an enhancement in stimulation by MgADP in channels expressing the compound heterozygous mutations or homozygous G296R mutation. In addition, the IC 50 for ATP inhibition of homomeric A30V channels was increased ~6-fold, and was increased ~3-fold for both heteromeric A30V+WT channels or compound heterozygous (A30V +G296R) channels. Thus, each mutation makes a mechanistically distinct contribution to the channel gain-of-function that results in neonatal diabetes, and which we predict may contribute to diabetes in related carrier individuals.",4 0
"Germline gain-of-function mutations in RAF1 cause Noonan syndrome. || Animals Cell Line Cell Line, Transformed Female Heart Humans Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Mutation, Missense Myocardium Noonan Syndrome Protein Structure, Tertiary Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-raf Zebrafish Zebrafish Proteins || Noonan syndrome is characterized by short stature, facial dysmorphia and a wide spectrum of congenital heart defects. Mutations of PTPN11, KRAS and SOS1 in the RAS-MAPK pathway cause approximately 60% of cases of Noonan syndrome. However, the gene(s) responsible for the remainder are unknown. We have identified five different mutations in RAF1 in ten individuals with Noonan syndrome; those with any of four mutations causing changes in the CR2 domain of RAF1 had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), whereas affected individuals with mutations leading to changes in the CR3 domain did not. Cells transfected with constructs containing Noonan syndrome-associated RAF1 mutations showed increased in vitro kinase and ERK activation, and zebrafish embryos with morpholino knockdown of raf1 demonstrated the need for raf1 for the development of normal myocardial structure and function. Thus, our findings implicate RAF1 gain-of-function mutations as a causative agent of a human developmental disorder, representing a new genetic mechanism for the activation of the MAPK pathway.",0
"Molecular characterization of phenylketonuria in Japanese patients. || Animals COS Cells Genotype Humans Japan Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Regression Analysis Sequence Analysis, DNA Transfection || We characterized phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotypes of Japanese patients with phenylketonuria (PKU) and hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA). PKU and HPA mutations in 41 Japanese patients were identified by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and direct sequencing, followed by restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis to find a large deletion involving exons 5 and 6. Of 82 mutant alleles, 76 (92%) were genotyped showing 21 mutations. The major mutations were R413P (30.5%), R243Q (7.3%), R241 C (7.3%), IVS4nt-1 (7.3%), T2781 (7.3%), E6nt-96A-->g (6.1%), Y356X (4.9%), R111X (3.7%), and 442-706delE5/6 (2.4%). Eight new mutations (L52 S, delS70, S70P, Y77X, IVS3nt-1, A132 V, W187 C, and C265Y) and a polymorphism of IVS10nt-14 were detected. In vitro PAH activities of mutant PAH cDNA constructs were determined by a COS cell expression system. Six mutations, viz., R408Q, L52 S, R241 C, S70P, V388 M, and R243Q, had 55%, 27%, 25%, 20%, 16% and 10% of the in vitro PAH activity of normal constructs, respectively. The mean pretreatment phenylalanine concentration (0.83+/-0.21 mmol/l) of patients carrying the R408Q, R241 C, or L52 S mutation and a null mutation was significantly lower (P<0.0005) than that (1.99+/-0.65 mmol/l) of patients with both alleles carrying mutations associated with a severe genotype. Simple linear regression analysis showed a correlation between pretreatment phenylalanine concentrations and predicted PAH activity in 29 Japanese PKU patients (y=31.9-1.03x, r=0.59, P<0.0001). Genotype determination is useful in the prediction of biochemical and clinical phenotypes in PKU and can be of particular help in managing patients with this disorder.",3 1 0
"A novel SCN5A mutation associated with idiopathic ventricular fibrillation without typical ECG findings of Brugada syndrome. || Adult Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence DNA Electrocardiography Genetic Testing Humans Japan Male Mutation, Missense NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Polymerase Chain Reaction Sodium Channels Syndrome Ventricular Fibrillation || Mutations in the human cardiac Na+ channel alpha subunit gene (SCN5A) are responsible for Brugada syndrome, an idiopathic ventricular fibrillation (IVF) subgroup characterized by right bundle branch block and ST elevation on an electrocardiogram (ECG). However, the molecular basis of IVF in subgroups lacking these ECG findings has not been elucidated. We performed genetic screenings of Japanese IVF patients and found a novel SCN5A missense mutation (S1710L) in one symptomatic IVF patient that did not exhibit the typical Brugada ECG. Heterologously expressed S1710L channels showed marked acceleration in the current decay together with a large hyperpolarizing shift of steady-state inactivation and depolarizing shift of activation. These findings suggest that SCN5A is one of the responsible genes for IVF patients who do not show typical ECG manifestations of the Brugada syndrome.",0
"The Missense p.S231F phenylalanine hydroxylase gene mutation causes complete loss of enzymatic activity in vitro. || Cell Line, Tumor Escherichia coli Gene Expression Humans Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Phenylketonuria (PKU), the most frequent disorder of amino acid metabolism, is caused by mutations in human phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH), leading to deficient enzyme activity. Previously reported but uncharacterized PAH gene mutation, p.S231F (c.692C > T), was detected in Serbian patients with classical PKU. We analyzed p.S231F PAH protein in prokaryotic (Escherichia coli) and eukaryotic expression system (hepatoma cells). In both systems the mutant enzyme was unstable. Residual enzyme activity in vitro was approximately 1%. Mutation p.S231F PAH was not activated by pre-incubation with phenylalanine substrate. We found no GroEL/GroES chaperone effect and slightly positive effect of the (6R)-L-erythro-5,6,7,8-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) on the stabilization of the protein structure. Our findings were in accordance with severe patients' phenotypes. In conclusion, p.S231F should be classified as a functionally null PAH gene mutation as it drastically reduces stability and activity of the PAH enzyme in vitro.",0
"Lack of correlation between p53-dependent transcriptional activity and the ability to induce apoptosis among 179 mutant p53s. || Apoptosis Bone Neoplasms Cell Growth Processes Humans Mutation Osteosarcoma Transcriptional Activation Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Tumor suppressor p53-dependent apoptosis is thought to be one of the most important tumor-suppressive functions in human tumorigenesis. However, whether the major mechanism underlying the p53-dependent apoptosis is transactivation dependent or independent remains unclear. Using 179 mutant p53s with diverse transcriptional activities for distinct p53-binding sequences in yeast, we evaluated both their sequence-specific transcriptional activities on six p53 target genes and their ability to induce apoptosis in Saos-2 cells. These mutant p53s also represented diversity in their ability to both transactivate target genes and induce apoptosis. We identified 17 mutant p53s with superior ability to induce apoptosis than wild-type p53 that tend to cluster at residues 121 or 290 to 292. There was no significant correlation between the two functional properties on any single target gene examined. Furthermore, the 17 mutant p53s were not classified in a specific cluster by hierarchical cluster analysis on their diverse transcriptional activities, indicating that these mutant p53s were not similar in the transcriptional activity of downstream genes. These results suggested that transactivation-dependent apoptosis does not always play a major role in p53-dependent apoptosis, indirectly supporting the importance role of the transactivation-independent mechanism.",0
Two mutations affecting the transport and maturation of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase in an adult case of glycogen storage disease type II. ||  || The autosomal recessive glycogen storage disease type II is associated with a deficiency of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (acid maltase). This paper reports on the mutations in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase alleles of an adult patient. A G-1927 to A transition was discovered in exon 14 causing the substitution of Gly-643 by Arg and a second C-2173 to T transition in exon 15 resulting in the substitution of Arg-725 by Trp. Each of the mutations was located in a different allele. The mutations were introduced in the wild-type lysosomal alpha-glucosidase cDNA and expressed in COS cells. Both mutations had a similar effect. The synthesis of the mutant enzyme precursors was not disturbed but the intracellular transport and maturation were impaired. As a result there was an overall deficiency of catalytic activity.,1 0
"Galactosidase Alpha p.A143T Variant Fabry Disease May Result in a Phenotype With Multifocal Microvascular Cerebral Involvement at a Young Age. ||  || A 16-year-old male presented with episodic headaches and a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that showed multifocal punctate to patchy white matter lesions. The diagnosis of Fabry disease (FD) was suggested upon the finding of significantly reduced plasma alpha-galactosidase A activity (0.62 µmol/L or 13% of normal; normal range ≥ 1.65 μmol/L) and genetic investigation confirmed the presence of a hemizygous missense variant in the galactosidase alpha (GLA) gene (p.A143T). Baseline assessment of other systemic involvement showed only a discrete proteinuria. FD is a rare lysosomal storage disorder. Genetic screening studies have revealed over 600 variants in the GLA gene. The p.A143T variant is a genetic variant of unknown significance, with its associated phenotype ranging from classical FD to healthy unaffected patients. Some authors, however, deem this variant non-pathogenic. We describe the case of a 16-year-old male with multifocal white matter lesions on brain MRI, who was diagnosed with FD and carried this genetic variant. The causative p.A143T mutation can be associated with a more severe subclinical phenotype than has been reported to date. Furthermore, a diagnosis of FD should be considered when finding asymptomatic cerebral white matter lesions in a young patient.",2 0
"Analysis of the DNA-binding activity of p53 mutants using functional protein microarrays and its relationship to transcriptional activation. || Binding Sites Cell Line, Tumor DNA Genetic Variation Humans Models, Molecular Mutant Proteins Mutation Protein Array Analysis Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Transcription, Genetic Transcriptional Activation Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Sequence-specific DNA binding is the key function through which tumor suppressor p53 exerts transactivation of the downstream target genes, often being impaired in cancer cells by mutations in the TP53 gene. Functional protein microarray technology enables a high-throughput parallel analysis of protein properties within one experiment under the same conditions. Using an array approach, we analyzed the DNA binding activity of wild type p53 protein and of 49 variants. Our results show significant differences in the binding properties between the p53 mutants. The C-terminal mutant R337C displayed the highest DNA binding activity on the array. However, the same mutant showed only a partial activation in the reporter gene assay and almost no activation of downstream target genes after transfection of expression vector into cells lacking endogenous p53. These observations demonstrate that DNA binding itself is not sufficient for activating the p53 target genes in at least some of the p53 mutants and, therefore, in vitro studies might not always reflect in vivo conditions.",0
"Glycogen storage disease type II: identification of four novel missense mutations (D645N, G648S, R672W, R672Q) and two insertions/deletions in the acid alpha-glucosidase locus of patients of differing phenotype. || Adult Child, Preschool Female Fibroblasts Frameshift Mutation Genotype Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Homozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Muscles Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation Phenotype Sequence Analysis, DNA Sequence Deletion alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII), an autosomal recessive myopathic disorder, results from deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase. We searched for mutations in an evolutionarily conserved region in 54 patients of differing phenotype. Four novel mutations (D645N, G448S, R672W, and R672Q) and a previously described mutation (C647W) were identified in five patients and their deleterious effect on enzyme expression demonstrated in vitro. Two novel frame-shifting insertions/deletions (delta nt766-785/insC and +insG@nt2243) were identified in two patients with exon 14 mutations. The remaining three patients were either homozygous for their mutations (D645N/D645 and C647W/C647W) or carried a previously described leaky splice site mutation (IVS1-13T-->G). For all patients ""in vivo"" enzyme activity was consistent with clinical phenotype. Agreement of genotype with phenotype and in vitro versus in vivo enzyme was seen in three patients (two infantile patients carrying C647W/C647W and D645N/+insG@nt2243 and an adult patient heteroallelic for G648S/IVS1-13T-->G). Relative discordance was found in a juvenile patient homozygous for the non-expressing R672Q and an adult patient heterozygous for the minimally expressing R672W and delta nt766-785/+insC. Possible explanations include differences in in vitro assays vs in vivo enzyme activity, tissue specific expression with diminished enzyme expression/stability in fibroblasts vs muscle, somatic mosaicism, and modifying genes.",3 1 4 0
"The DNA-binding domain mediates both nuclear and cytosolic functions of p53. || Apoptosis Binding Sites Cell Nucleus Cytosol Humans Models, Molecular Mutagenesis Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, Biomolecular Protein Interaction Mapping Protein Multimerization Signal Transduction Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Ultraviolet Rays bcl-X Protein || Under conditions of genotoxic stress, human p53 activates the apoptotic effectors BAX or BAK to result in mitochondrial outer-membrane permeabilization and apoptosis. Antiapoptotic BCL-2 family member BCL-xL opposes this activity by sequestering cytosolic p53 via association with its DNA-binding domain, an interaction enhanced by p53 tetramerization. Here we characterized the BCL-xL-p53 complex by NMR spectroscopy and modulated it through mutagenesis to determine the relative contributions of BCL-xL's interactions with p53 or other BCL-2 family proteins to the BCL-xL-dependent inhibition of UV irradiation-induced apoptosis. Under our experimental conditions, one-third of the antiapoptotic activity of BCL-xL was mediated by p53 sequestration and the remaining two-thirds through sequestration of proapoptotic BCL-2 family members. Our studies define the contributions of cytosolic p53 to UV irradiation-induced apoptosis and provide opportunities to explore its contributions to other p53-dependent apoptotic signaling pathways.",0
"Fabry disease in a Japanese population-molecular and biochemical characteristics. ||  || We had experienced 117 Japanese Fabry patients (72 males and 45 females) from 1977 to 2006, and then we generated an improved Fabry analysis system in 2007 and have found 196 ones (95 males and 101 females) since then. In this study, we summarized the data of the patients and tried to elucidate the molecular and biochemical characteristics of Japanese Fabry patients. Gene analysis revealed various GLA mutations, including missense mutations (56.5%, 48 types); nonsense mutations (15.9%, 13 types); deletions (12.6%, 13 types); splicing defects (10.1%, 6 types); insertions (1.0%, 2 types), and insertions/deletions (0.5%, 1 type), in the patients that were tested. Amino acid substitutions resulting from the missense mutations found in the classic form patients tended to be localized in the core of the GLA protein, and those in the later-onset ones in the peripheral region. The most commonly identified pathogenic mutations arec.888G>A (p.M296I),c.936+919G>A,c.679C>T (p.R227X),c.335G>A (p.R112H),c.334C>T (p.R112C), andc.902G>A (p.R301Q). Among them,c.888G>A (p.M296I) is unique to Japanese Fabry patients. On the other hand,c.936+919G>A is a variant that has been frequently detected in Taiwan Chinese Fabry patients, andc.335G>A (p.R112H) in various countries. These are found in later-onset patients, andc.679C>T (p.R227X) andc.334C>T (p.R112C) classic ones.c.902G>A (p.R301Q) is found in both classic and later-onset form patients. A possible functional polymorphism,c.196G>C (p.E66Q), was identified in 0.4% of the subjects who underwent high-risk screening. The biochemical findings including leukocyte α-galactosidase A activity, plasma globotriaosylsphingosine level and urinary globotriaosylceramide in the individual phenotypic groups well reflected the phenotypic differences in this disease. The results will be useful for understanding the basis of Fabry disease in Japan.",0
"The pathological effects of connexin 26 variants related to hearing loss by in silico and in vitro analysis. || Cloning, Molecular Connexin 26 Connexins Gap Junctions Gene Expression Regulation Genetic Variation HeLa Cells Hearing Loss Humans Mutation Protein Conformation Transfection || Gap junctions (GJs) are intercellular channels associated with cell-cell communication. Connexin 26 (Cx26) encoded by the GJB2 gene forms GJs of the inner ear, and mutations of GJB2 cause congenital hearing loss that can be syndromic or non-syndromic. It is difficult to predict pathogenic effects using only genetic analysis. Using ionic and biochemical coupling tests, we evaluated the pathogenic effects of Cx26 variants using computational analyses to predict structural abnormalities. For seven out of ten variants, we predicted the variation would result in a loss of GJ function, whereas the others would completely fail to form GJs. Functional studies demonstrated that, although all variants were able to function normally as hetero-oligomeric GJ channels, six variants (p.E47K, p.E47Q, p.H100L, p.H100Y, p.R127L, and p.M195L) did not function normally as homo-oligomeric GJ channels. Interestingly, GJs composed of the Cx26 variant p.R127H were able to function normally, even as homo-oligomeric GJ channels. This study demonstrates the particular location and property of an amino acid are more important mainly than the domain where they belong in the formation and function of GJ, and will provide information that is useful for the accurate diagnosis of hearing loss.",0
"Molecular genetics and impact of residual in vitro phenylalanine hydroxylase activity on tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness in Turkish PKU population. || Alleles Biopterin Dose-Response Relationship, Drug Female Genetic Association Studies Genetic Variation Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Male Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Turkey || The prevalence of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH)-deficient phenylketonuria (PKU) in Turkey is high (1 in 6500 births), but data concerning the genotype distribution and impact of the genotype on tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) therapy are scarce. To characterize the phenotypic and genotypic variability in the Turkish PKU population and to correlate it with physiological response to BH(4) challenge. We genotyped 588 hyperphenylalaninemic patients and performed a BH(4) loading test (20mg/kg bw) in 462 patients. Residual PAH activity of mutant proteins was calculated from available in vitro expression data. Data were tabulated in the BIOPKU database (www.biopku.org). Eighty-eight mutations were observed, the most common missense mutations being the splice variant c.1066-11G>A (24.6%). Twenty novel mutations were detected (11 missense, 4 splice-site, and 5 deletion/insertions). Two mutations were observed in 540/588 patients (91.8%) but in 9 patients atypical genotypes with >2 mutations were found (8 with p.R155H in cis with another variant) and in 19 patients mutations were found in BH(4)-metabolizing genes. The most common genotype was c.1066-11G>A/c.1066-11G>A (15.5%). Approximately 22% of patients responded to BH(4) challenge. A substantial in vitro residual activity (average >25% of the wild-type enzyme) was associated with response to BH(4). In homozygous genotypes (n=206), both severity of the phenotype (r=0.83) and residual PAH activity (r=0.85) correlate with BH(4) responsiveness. Together with the BH(4) challenge, these data enable the genotype-based classification of BH(4) responsiveness and document importance of residual PAH activity. This first report of a large-scale genotype assessment in a population of Turkish PKU patients also documents a high prevalence (47%) of the severe classic phenotype.",3 1 0
"Molecular correlations in phenylketonuria: mutation patterns and corresponding biochemical and clinical phenotypes in a heterogeneous California population. || California Female Genetic Heterogeneity Genotype Humans Intelligence Linear Models Male Mutation Neonatal Screening Phenotype Phenylketonurias Population Surveillance || We studied 133 California phenylketonuria (PKU) patients and one obligate heterozygote to delineate the molecular basis of PKU in a population with greater ethnic diversity than in previous studies, and to determine whether a correlation exists between genotype and clinical phenotype, with the latter defined by both the diagnostic pretreatment blood phenylalanine (PHE) level and cognitive (IQ) test scores. To determine PAH genotypes, we used PCR-mediated amplification, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, and direct sequencing on dried whole blood samples. Where possible, mutation severity was defined according to predicted in vitro PAH enzyme activity estimated by using Cos cell expression analysis for a given mutation. We then asked whether mutation severity, as defined by such expression analysis, correlated with pretreatment PHE levels or with IQ test results. A mutation was identified in 236 (88%) of 267 mutant alleles. Seventeen new mutant alleles were found; A47E, T81P, I102T, E182G, T328D, Y343P, K371R, Y387H, A389E, E422K, IVS9nt5, IVS11nt20, delS70, del364-368/del198-220, delF299, delT323, and -1C/T. In striking contrast to a number of studies in other populations, in this study, based on predicted PAH activity, we observed no correlation between mutation severity and pretreatment PHE levels. There was also no correlation between genotype and IQ. We conclude that in samples collected from an ethnically heterogeneous population, there is no correlation of mutation severity with either pretreatment PHE levels or IQ measurement in treated patients. We caution that genetic counseling in PKU should incorporate the notion that prognosis may not be predicted with precision based on mutation analysis in a given patient.",3 0
"Germline KRAS and BRAF mutations in cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome. || Amino Acid Sequence Face Heart Defects, Congenital Humans Intellectual Disability Molecular Sequence Data Proto-Oncogene Proteins Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras) Reference Values Skin Abnormalities Syndrome ras Proteins || Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome is characterized by a distinctive facial appearance, heart defects and mental retardation. It phenotypically overlaps with Noonan and Costello syndrome, which are caused by mutations in PTPN11 and HRAS, respectively. In 43 individuals with CFC, we identified two heterozygous KRAS mutations in three individuals and eight BRAF mutations in 16 individuals, suggesting that dysregulation of the RAS-RAF-ERK pathway is a common molecular basis for the three related disorders.",0
"Remarkably low fibroblast acid α-glucosidase activity in three adults with Pompe disease. || Adult Alleles Fibroblasts Genetic Association Studies Genotype Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Heterozygote Humans Infant, Newborn Male Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal Mutation Phenotype alpha-Glucosidases || Most adults with Pompe disease are compound heterozygotes in which one acid α-glucosidase (GAA) allele harbors the c.-32-13T>G mutation, causing partial loss of GAA, and the other allele harbors a fully deleterious mutation. The fibroblast GAA activity in these patients is usually between 5% and 25% of the average in healthy individuals. In some adult patients, however, the fibroblast GAA activity is much lower and is in the range that is normally observed in classic-infantile Pompe disease. We investigated the genotype-phenotype correlation in three such adult patients and measured the GAA activity as well as the glycogen content in muscle and fibroblasts in order to better understand the clinical course. DNA was sequenced and GAA activity and glycogen content were measured in leukocytes, fibroblasts and muscle. Muscle biopsies were microscopically analyzed and the biosynthesis of GAA in fibroblasts was analyzed by immunoblotting. GAA activity and glycogen content in fibroblasts and muscle tissue in healthy controls, adult patients with Pompe disease and classic-infantile patients were compared with those of the three index patients. One patient had genotype c.525delT/c.671G>A (r.0/p.Arg224Gln). Two affected brothers had genotype c.569G>A/c.1447G>A (p.Arg190His/p.Gly483Arg). In all three cases the GAA activity and the glycogen content in fibroblasts were within the same range as in classic-infantile Pompe disease, but the activity and glycogen content in muscle were both within the adult range. In fibroblasts, the first step of GAA synthesis appeared unaffected but lysosomal forms of GAA were not detectable with immunoblotting. Some adult patients with mutations other than c.-32-13T>G can have very low GAA activity in fibroblasts but express higher activity in muscle and store less glycogen in muscle than patients with classic-infantile Pompe disease. This might explain why these patients have a slowly progressive course of Pompe disease.",3 1 0
"Melanocortin 4 receptor mutations in a large cohort of severely obese adults: prevalence, functional classification, genotype-phenotype relationship, and lack of association with binge eating. || Adult Amino Acid Sequence Body Mass Index Cohort Studies DNA Feeding and Eating Disorders Female Gene Frequency Genotype Heterozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Obesity Phenotype Prospective Studies Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Cell Surface Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction alpha-MSH || Heterozygous mutations in the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) gene are the most common monogenic form of severe obesity in children. There are conflicting reports regarding the prevalence, nature, and pathogenic effects of MC4R mutations in adults with severe late-onset obesity. Our objective was to determine the prevalence of MC4R mutations in a cohort of severely obese adults and to determine the clinical phenotype and the phenotype-genotype relationship within adult MC4R mutation carriers. We conducted an observational study at a referral center. Participants included 769 adult patients with body mass index of at least 35 kg/m(2) and 444 nonobese control individuals. There were no interventions. We assessed the prevalence of pathogenic MC4R mutations, functional characteristics of the detected mutations, phenotype, and phenotype-genotype relationship within mutation carriers. The global prevalence of obesity-specific MC4R mutations was 2.6%, and the 95% confidence interval (CI(95)) was 1.5-3.7. The prevalence of MC4R mutations was similar in patients developing obesity in childhood (2.83%; CI(95), 0.9-4.8) and in patients with a later onset of the disease (2.35%; CI(95), 0.9-3.8). Adult obese MC4R mutation carriers did not present with binge eating or with any specific clinical phenotype. The severity of the functional alterations of the mutated MC4Rs and in particular the intracellular retention of the receptor correlates both with the severity and the onset of the obesity in the mutation carriers. Obese adult carriers of functionally relevant MC4R mutations do not specifically present with binge-eating disorder or a history of early-onset obesity. The onset and severity of the obesity in the carriers is related to the functional severity of the MC4R mutations.",4 0
"Mutational analysis of allosteric activation and inhibition of glucokinase. || Allosteric Regulation Carrier Proteins Fluorescence Glucokinase Glucose Humans Kinetics Point Mutation Protein Conformation Tryptophan || GK (glucokinase) is activated by glucose binding to its substrate site, is inhibited by GKRP (GK regulatory protein) and stimulated by GKAs (GK activator drugs). To explore further the mechanisms of these processes we studied pure recombinant human GK (normal enzyme and a selection of 31 mutants) using steady-state kinetics of the enzyme and TF (tryptophan fluorescence). TF studies of the normal binary GK-glucose complex corroborate recent crystallography studies showing that it exists in a closed conformation greatly different from the open conformation of the ligand-free structure, but indistinguishable from the ternary GK-glucose-GKA complex. GKAs did activate and GKRP did inhibit normal GK, whereas its TF was doubled by glucose saturation. However, the enzyme kinetics, GKRP inhibition, TF enhancement by glucose and responsiveness to GKA of the selected mutants varied greatly. Two predominant response patterns were identified accounting for nearly all mutants: (i) GK mutants with a normal or close to normal response to GKA, normally low basal TF (indicating an open conformation), some variability of kinetic parameters (k(cat), glucose S(0.5), h and ATP K(m)), but usually strong GKRP inhibition (13/31); and (ii) GK mutants that are refractory to GKAs, exhibit relatively high basal TF (indicating structural compaction and partial closure), usually show strongly enhanced catalytic activity primarily due to lowering of the glucose S(0.5), but with reduced or no GKRP inhibition in most cases (14/31). These results and those of previous studies are best explained by envisioning a common allosteric regulator region with spatially non-overlapping GKRP- and GKA-binding sites.",0
"Evaluation of the contribution of the three breast cancer susceptibility genes CHEK2, STK11, and PALB2 in non-BRCA1/2 French Canadian families with high risk of breast cancer. || Adult Aged Breast Neoplasms Canada Carcinoma Checkpoint Kinase 2 DNA Mutational Analysis Family Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group N Protein Female Genes, BRCA1 Genes, BRCA2 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Middle Aged Nuclear Proteins Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Quebec Risk Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Inactivating mutations of the CHEK2 and STK11 genes are responsible for Li-Fraumeni and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, respectively, both autosomal dominant syndromes associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. The PALB2/FANCN gene encodes a nuclear partner of BRCA2 and acts as a linker between BRCA1 and BRCA2. Monoallelic PALB2 truncating mutations were shown to confer higher risk of breast cancer. To evaluate the proportion of French Canadian non-BRCA1/BRCA2 families with high risk of breast cancer potentially harboring alterations in these three breast cancer susceptibility genes, the whole coding and flanking intronic sequences were analyzed in a series of 96 high-risk breast cancer individuals. Despite no PALB2 deleterious truncating mutations being identified, the c.1100delC breast-cancer-associated CHEK2 mutation and a STK11 mutation reported to be the causative mutation in a Peutz-Jeghers family were identified. This extensive analysis also led to the identification of several variants in these genes. Ascertainment of allele frequency of these variants in a cohort of 96 healthy unrelated women suggests a difference in allele frequency for two STK11 intronic variants. In addition, large genomic rearrangements in both STK11 and PALB2 were also examined. Our analysis led to the conclusion that CHEK2, STK11, and PALB2 mutations or large genomic rearrangements of either STK11 or PALB2 are rare, and do not contribute to a substantial fraction of breast cancer susceptibility in high-risk French Canadian breast cancer families.",0
"Unexpected mexiletine responses of a mutant cardiac Na+ channel implicate the selectivity filter as a structural determinant of antiarrhythmic drug access. || Amino Acid Substitution Anti-Arrhythmia Agents Heart Humans Leucine Lidocaine Mexiletine Mutation Myocardium Serine Sodium Channel Blockers Sodium Channels || Gating properties of Na(+) channels are the critical determinants for the state-dependent block by class I antiarrhythmic drugs; however, recent site-directed mutagenesis studies have shown that the Na(+) channel selectivity filter region controls drug access to and dissociation from the binding site. To validate these observations, we have exploited a naturally occurring cardiac Na(+) channel mutation, S1710L, located next to the putative selectivity filter residue of domain 4, and evaluated the pharmacological properties to mexiletine using whole-cell, patch-clamp recordings. Consistent with the large negative shift of steady-state inactivation and the enhanced slow inactivation, the S1710L channel showed greater mexiletine tonic block than wild-type (WT) channel. In contradiction, S1710L showed attenuated use-dependent block by mexiletine and accelerated recovery from block, suggesting that the drug escape though the external access path is facilitated. Extracellularly applied QX-314, a membrane-impermeant derivative of lidocaine, elicited significantly enhanced tonic block in S1710L similar to mexiletine. However, recovery from internally applied QX-314 was accelerated by 4.4-fold in S1710L compared with WT. These results suggest that the drug access to and dissociation from the binding site through the hydrophilic path are substantially altered. Moreover, K(+) permeability was 1.9-fold increased in S1710L, verifying that the mutated residue is located in the ion-conducting pore. We propose that the Na(+) channel selectivity filter region is a structural determinant for the antiarrhythmic drug sensitivity in addition to gating properties of the indigenous Na(+) channels that govern the state-dependent drug block.",0
"The genotype-phenotype correlation in Pompe disease. || Age of Onset Genetic Association Studies Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Haplotypes Humans Mutation Structure-Activity Relationship alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive lysosomal glycogen storage disorder that is caused by acid α-glucosidase (GAA) deficiency and is due to pathogenic sequence variations in the corresponding GAA gene. The correlation between genotypes and phenotypes is strict, in that patients with the most severe phenotype, classic infantile Pompe disease, have two pathogenic mutations, one in each GAA allele, that prevent the formation of GAA or totally obliterates its function. All patients with less progressive phenotypes have at least one sequence variation that allows normal or low level synthesis of GAA leading to the formation of analytically measurable, low level GAA activity in most cases. There is an overall trend of finding higher GAA enzyme levels in patients with onset of symptoms in adulthood when compared to patients who show clinical manifestations in early childhood, aged 0-5 years, with a rapidly progressive course, but who lack the severe characteristics of classic infantile Pompe disease. However, several cases have been reported of adult-onset disease with very low GAA activity, which in all those cases corresponds with the GAA genotype. The clinical diversity observed within a large group of patients with functionally the same GAA genotype and the same c.-32-13C > T haplotype demonstrates that modifying factors can have a substantial effect on the clinical course of Pompe disease, disturbing the GAA genotype-phenotype correlation. The present day challenge is to identify these factors and explore them as therapeutic targets.",0
"A method to select for mutator DNA polymerase deltas in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Pair Mismatch Cadmium DNA Mutational Analysis DNA Polymerase III DNA Repair DNA-Directed DNA Polymerase Molecular Sequence Data Point Mutation Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins Selection, Genetic Sequence Alignment Viral Proteins || Proofreading DNA polymerases share common short peptide motifs that bind Mg(2+) in the exonuclease active center; however, hydrolysis rates are not the same for all of the enzymes, which indicates that there are functional and likely structural differences outside of the conserved residues. Since structural information is available for only a few proofreading DNA polymerases, we developed a genetic selection method to identify mutant alleles of the POL3 gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which encode DNA polymerase delta mutants that replicate DNA with reduced fidelity. The selection procedure is based on genetic methods used to identify ""mutator"" DNA polymerases in bacteriophage T4. New yeast DNA polymerase delta mutants were identified, but some mutants expected from studies of the phage T4 DNA polymerase were not detected. This would indicate that there may be important differences in the proofreading pathways catalyzed by the two DNA polymerases.",0
"Adult-onset glycogen storage disease type II: phenotypic and allelic heterogeneity in German patients. || Adult Age of Onset Alleles Alternative Splicing Amino Acid Sequence Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Heterogeneity Germany Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Introns Lysosomes Middle Aged Mutagenesis, Insertional Phenotype Point Mutation Sequence Deletion Sequence Homology, Amino Acid Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII, Pompe's disease) is an autosomal recessive inherited deficiency of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (GAA). Clinical as well as biochemical and allelic heterogeneity have been described in GSDII. We identified mutations within the GAA gene in seven unrelated German patients, six with adult- and one with juvenile-onset GSDII. Beside previously described mutations [IVS1 (-13T --> G), delta(exon) 18, C1634T], we characterized four new mutations of GSDII: IVS6 (-22T --> G), 271delG, G1912T (Gly638Trp), and 2432insC. The IVS6 (-22T --> G) mutation gives rise to aberrant splicing, causing inframe deletions of 25 or 40 amino acids within the GAA coding sequence and the insertion of a sequence of seven missense amino acids. Two affected siblings and an unrelated patient with adult GSDII are apparently homozygous for the exon 18 deletion. Both siblings are also heteroallelic for IVS1 (-13T --> G). In conclusion, we observed pronounced allelic heterogeneity and an unexpectedly high frequency of homozygosity for larger in-frame deletions within the GAA coding sequence in German adult-onset GSDII patients.",3 1 0
"KCNQ4, a novel potassium channel expressed in sensory outer hair cells, is mutated in dominant deafness. || Amino Acid Sequence Animals Chromosome Mapping Cloning, Molecular DNA, Complementary Ear, Inner Female Gene Expression Regulation Genes, Dominant Hair Cells, Auditory, Outer Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans KCNQ Potassium Channels Mice Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Oocytes Pedigree Potassium Channels Potassium Channels, Voltage-Gated Xenopus laevis || Potassium channels regulate electrical signaling and the ionic composition of biological fluids. Mutations in the three known genes of the KCNQ branch of the K+ channel gene family underlie inherited cardiac arrhythmias (in some cases associated with deafness) and neonatal epilepsy. We have now cloned KCNQ4, a novel member of this branch. It maps to the DFNA2 locus for a form of nonsyndromic dominant deafness. In the cochlea, it is expressed in sensory outer hair cells. A mutation in this gene in a DFNA2 pedigree changes a residue in the KCNQ4 pore region. It abolishes the potassium currents of wild-type KCNQ4 on which it exerts a strong dominant-negative effect. Whereas mutations in KCNQ1 cause deafness by affecting endolymph secretion, the mechanism leading to KCNQ4-related hearing loss is intrinsic to outer hair cells.",2 4 0
"Melanocortin-4 receptor gene: case-control study and transmission disequilibrium test confirm that functionally relevant mutations are compatible with a major gene effect for extreme obesity. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aging Animals Body Height Body Mass Index Body Weight COS Cells Case-Control Studies Cercopithecus aethiops Child DNA Female Gene Expression Genotype Humans Linkage Disequilibrium Male Middle Aged Mutation Obesity, Morbid Odds Ratio Phenotype Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Corticotropin Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction || We initially performed a mutation screen of the coding region of the MC4R in 808 extremely obese children and adolescents and 327 underweight or normal-weight controls allowing for a case-control study. A total of 16 different missense, nonsense, and frameshift mutations were found in the obese study group; five of these have not been observed previously. In vitro assays revealed that nine [the haplotype (Y35X; D37V) was counted as one mutation] of the 16 mutations led to impaired cAMP responses, compared with wild-type receptor constructs. In contrast, only one novel missense mutation was detected in the controls, which did not alter receptor function. The association test based on functionally relevant mutations was positive (P = 0.006, Fisher's exact test, one-sided). We proceeded by screening a total of 1040 parents of 520 of the aforementioned obese young index patients to perform transmission disequilibrium tests. The 11 parental carriers of functionally relevant mutations transmitted the mutation in 81.8% (P = 0.033; exact one-sided McNemar test). These results support the hypothesis that these MC4R mutations represent major gene effects for obesity.",4 0
"[Genetic and clinical study of three Chinese pedigrees with Fabry disease]. ||  || Fabry disease is a rare lysosome storage disease featuring X-linked recessive inheritance. The study was to explore potential mutations of alpha-galactosidase A (GLA) gene and their correlation with clinic manifestations in three Chinese pedigrees with Fabry disease. All exons and flanking sequences of GLA gene were amplified with PCR. Potential mutations were detected with bidirectional DNA sequencing. Correlation between particular mutations and clinic features were analyzed. A unreported missense mutation, c.797A>C (D266A) in GLA exon 5 was identified in pedigree 1. Also in exon 5, a missense mutation c.644A>G (N215S) was found in pedigree 2. In pedigree 3, a nonsense mutation c.355C>T (Q119X) was found in exon 2. The c.797A>C mutation was not detected in 200 unrelated male controls. The probands of pedigrees 1 and 3 had presented mainly with skin damage and chronic renal insufficiency, whilst the proband of pedigree 2 had presented with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The unreported c.797A>C (D266A) mutation is the sixth missense type mutation of the 266th codon of GLA gene, and all other 5 missense mutations reported previously had been confirmed to be responsible for Fabry disease. The c.797A>C mutation, not found in 200 unrelated male controls, may be the causative mutation in pedigree 1. The c.644A>G and c.355C>T mutations were first detected in Chinese patients. Variable phenotypes of Fabry disease may be in part attributed to the natures of particular mutations of GLA gene.",3 0
"Germline mutations in genes within the MAPK pathway cause cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome. || Abnormalities, Multiple Adolescent Adult Amino Acid Substitution Child Child, Preschool Craniofacial Abnormalities Extracellular Signal-Regulated MAP Kinases Female Germ-Line Mutation Growth Disorders Heart Defects, Congenital Humans Infant MAP Kinase Kinase 1 MAP Kinase Kinase 2 MAP Kinase Kinase Kinases MAP Kinase Signaling System Male Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases Mutation, Missense Phosphorylation Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf Skin Abnormalities Syndrome Transfection || Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome is a sporadic developmental disorder involving characteristic craniofacial features, cardiac defects, ectodermal abnormalities, and developmental delay. We demonstrate that heterogeneous de novo missense mutations in three genes within the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway cause CFC syndrome. The majority of cases (18 out of 23) are caused by mutations in BRAF, a gene frequently mutated in cancer. Of the 11 mutations identified, two result in amino acid substitutions that occur in tumors, but most are unique and suggest previously unknown mechanisms of B-Raf activation. Furthermore, three of five individuals without BRAF mutations had missense mutations in either MEK1 or MEK2, downstream effectors of B-Raf. Our findings highlight the involvement of the MAPK pathway in human development and will provide a molecular diagnosis of CFC syndrome.",0
"The NMD mRNA surveillance pathway downregulates aberrant E-cadherin transcripts in gastric cancer cells and in CDH1 mutation carriers. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Antigens, CD Base Sequence Cadherins Codon, Nonsense Down-Regulation Eukaryotic Initiation Factor-4A Germ-Line Mutation Heterozygote Humans Middle Aged RNA Helicases RNA Stability RNA, Messenger Signal Transduction Stomach Neoplasms Trans-Activators Tumor Cells, Cultured || Germline mutations in the gene encoding the tumour suppressor E-cadherin (CDH1) are the underlying genetic defect responsible for hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). A remarkably high percentage ( approximately 80%) of CDH1 mutations in HDGC patients and carriers generate premature termination codons (PTCs). Here, we examined whether CDH1 transcripts harbouring PTCs are downregulated by nonsense-mediated decay (NMD), an RNA surveillance pathway that degrades PTC-bearing transcripts. Using an allele-specific expression (ASE) assay to differentiate between mutated and wild-type CDH1 alleles, we found that PTC-bearing CDH1 mRNAs are strongly downregulated in normal gastric tissue from several CDH1 mutation carriers. We show that NMD is responsible for this robust downregulation, as CDH1 transcripts harbouring PTCs in the KATO-III gastric tumour cell line were upregulated in response to protein synthesis inhibitors or depletion of the NMD factors UPF1 and eIF4AIII. Analysis of HDGC patients harbouring CDH1 alleles with PTCs at a wide variety of different positions indicates an association of their predicted ability to induce NMD and an earlier age of onset of gastric cancer. This suggests that NMD may be detrimental for HDGC patients and therefore NMD is a potentially useful therapeutic target for CDH1 mutation carriers.",0
"Newborn screening for Fabry disease in the north-west of Spain. || Biomarkers Dried Blood Spot Testing Fabry Disease Feasibility Studies Female Humans Infant, Newborn Male Neonatal Screening Polymorphism, Genetic Prevalence Spain alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by the impairment of α-galactosidase A. Enzyme replacement therapy is available to treat patients, who often experience delayed diagnosis. A newborn screening for Fabry disease was performed to study the prevalence of the pathology and to evaluate the possibility to implement the test in systematic screenings. We collected 14,600 dried blood spot samples (7575 males and 7025 females) and carried out a diagnostic study by fluorometric measurement of α-galactosidase A enzymatic activity and GLA gene sequencing. We detected one patient with a mutation in GLA associated with classical Fabry Disease (M290I), ten subjects carrying genetic variants of uncertain diagnosis (S126G, R118C, A143T), and a girl with the non-characterized variant F18Y, which was not previously described. Additional 25 samples presented nucleotide substitutions described as polymorphisms (D313Y, rs2071225, and rs2071397). The estimated prevalence for Fabry disease in north-western Spanish males is of 0.013%. These results confirm that the prevalence of Fabry disease is underestimated and systematic screening is feasible; however, further characterization of variants of uncertain clinical significance is necessary to establish protocols of patients' management. What is Known: • Fabry disease is a rare disease of delayed diagnosis, whose prevalence is underestimated. However, early diagnosis is important for better efficiency of the current available treatment. What is New: • This newborn screening for Fabry disease performed on Spanish population reveals a prevalence of genetic alterations in GLA of 0.1% in males (0.013% with classic Fabry disease) and also characterizes these modifications in order to discriminate between pathogenic mutations and genetic variants of unknown significance.",0
"Germline gain-of-function mutations in SOS1 cause Noonan syndrome. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Male Models, Biological Models, Molecular Noonan Syndrome Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases SOS1 Protein || Noonan syndrome, the most common single-gene cause of congenital heart disease, is characterized by short stature, characteristic facies, learning problems and leukemia predisposition. Gain-of-function mutations in PTPN11, encoding the tyrosine phosphatase SHP2, cause approximately 50% of Noonan syndrome cases. SHP2 is required for RAS-ERK MAP kinase (MAPK) cascade activation, and Noonan syndrome mutants enhance ERK activation ex vivo and in mice. KRAS mutations account for <5% of cases of Noonan syndrome, but the gene(s) responsible for the remainder are unknown. We identified missense mutations in SOS1, which encodes an essential RAS guanine nucleotide-exchange factor (RAS-GEF), in approximately 20% of cases of Noonan syndrome without PTPN11 mutation. The prevalence of specific cardiac defects differs in SOS1 mutation-associated Noonan syndrome. Noonan syndrome-associated SOS1 mutations are hypermorphs encoding products that enhance RAS and ERK activation. Our results identify SOS1 mutants as a major cause of Noonan syndrome, representing the first example of activating GEF mutations associated with human disease and providing new insights into RAS-GEF regulation.",0
"Utilizing ethnic-specific differences in minor allele frequency to recategorize reported pathogenic deafness variants. || Case-Control Studies Connexins Ethnic Groups Evolution, Molecular Exome Gene Frequency Genetic Variation Genome, Human Genome-Wide Association Study Hearing Loss Humans Phylogeny || Ethnic-specific differences in minor allele frequency impact variant categorization for genetic screening of nonsyndromic hearing loss (NSHL) and other genetic disorders. We sought to evaluate all previously reported pathogenic NSHL variants in the context of a large number of controls from ethnically distinct populations sequenced with orthogonal massively parallel sequencing methods. We used HGMD, ClinVar, and dbSNP to generate a comprehensive list of reported pathogenic NSHL variants and re-evaluated these variants in the context of 8,595 individuals from 12 populations and 6 ethnically distinct major human evolutionary phylogenetic groups from three sources (Exome Variant Server, 1000 Genomes project, and a control set of individuals created for this study, the OtoDB). Of the 2,197 reported pathogenic deafness variants, 325 (14.8%) were present in at least one of the 8,595 controls, indicating a minor allele frequency (MAF) > 0.00006. MAFs ranged as high as 0.72, a level incompatible with pathogenicity for a fully penetrant disease like NSHL. Based on these data, we established MAF thresholds of 0.005 for autosomal-recessive variants (excluding specific variants in GJB2) and 0.0005 for autosomal-dominant variants. Using these thresholds, we recategorized 93 (4.2%) of reported pathogenic variants as benign. Our data show that evaluation of reported pathogenic deafness variants using variant MAFs from multiple distinct ethnicities and sequenced by orthogonal methods provides a powerful filter for determining pathogenicity. The proposed MAF thresholds will facilitate clinical interpretation of variants identified in genetic testing for NSHL. All data are publicly available to facilitate interpretation of genetic variants causing deafness.",0
"Functional features of RUNX1 mutants in acute transformation of chronic myeloid leukemia and their contribution to inducing murine full-blown leukemia. || Adolescent Adult Animals Blast Crisis Cell Differentiation Cell Transformation, Neoplastic Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit Female Humans Immunoprecipitation Leukemia, Myelogenous, Chronic, BCR-ABL Positive Male Mice Middle Aged Mutation Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Transfection Young Adult || The BCR-ABL fusion protein generated by t(9;22)(q34;q11) in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) plays an essential role in the pathogenesis of the myeloproliferative disorder status at the chronic phase of the disease, but progression from the chronic phase to blast crisis (BC) is believed to require additional mutations. To explore the underlying mechanisms for BC, which is characterized by a blockage of blood cell differentiation, we screened several genes crucial to hematopoiesis and identified 10 types of mutations in RUNX1 among 11 of 85 (12.9%) patients with acute transformation of CML. Most of the mutations occurred in the runt homology domain, including H78Q, W79C, R139G, D171G, R174Q, L71fs-ter94, and V91fs-ter94. Further studies indicated that RUNX1 mutants not only exhibited decreased transactivation activity but also had an inhibitory effect on the WT RUNX1. To investigate the leukemogenic effect of mutated RUNX1, H78Q and V91fs-ter94 were transduced into 32D cells or BCR-ABL-harboring murine cells, respectively. Consistent with the myeloblastic features of advanced CML patients with RUNX1 mutations, H78Q and V91fs-ter94 disturbed myeloid differentiation and induced a BC or accelerated phase-like phenotype in mice. These results suggest that RUNX1 abnormalities may promote acute myeloid leukemic transformation in a subset of CML patients.",0
"Germline mutations in the breast cancer susceptibility gene PTEN are rare in high-risk non-BRCA1/2 French Canadian breast cancer families. || Animals BRCA1 Protein BRCA2 Protein Base Sequence Breast Neoplasms Canada France Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Molecular Sequence Data PTEN Phosphohydrolase Ribonucleases Risk Factors Sequence Alignment Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid || Cowden syndrome is a disease associated with an increase in breast cancer susceptibility. Alleles in PTEN and other breast cancer susceptibility genes would be responsible for approximately 25% of the familial component of breast cancer risk, BRCA1 and BRCA2 being the two major genes responsible for this inherited risk. In order to evaluate the proportion of high-risk French Canadian non-BRCA1/BRCA2 breast/ovarian cancer families potentially harboring a PTEN germline mutation, the whole coding and flanking intronic sequences were analyzed in a series of 98 breast cancer cases. Although no germline mutation has been identified in the coding region, our study led to the identification of four intronic variants. Further investigations were performed to analyze the effect of these variants, alone and/or in combination, on splicing and PTEN protein levels. Despite suggestive evidence emerging from in silico analyses, the presence of these intronic variants do not seem to alter RNA splicing or PTEN protein levels. In addition, as loss of PTEN or part of it has been reported, Western blot analysis has also been performed. No major deletion could be identified in our cohort. Therefore, assuming a Poisson distribution for the frequency of deleterious mutation in our cohort, if the frequency of such deleterious mutation was 2%, we would have had a 90% or greater chance of observing at least one such mutation. These results suggest that PTEN germline mutations are rare and are unlikely to account for a significant proportion of familial breast cancer cases in the French Canadian population.",0
"LKB1 interacts with and phosphorylates PTEN: a functional link between two proteins involved in cancer predisposing syndromes. || Amino Acid Sequence Cell Nucleus Cells, Cultured Cytoplasm Genes, Tumor Suppressor Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Phosphorylation Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Two-Hybrid System Techniques || Germline mutations of the LKB1 (STK11) tumor suppressor gene lead to Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) and predisposition to cancer. LKB1 encodes a serine/threonine kinase generally inactivated in PJS patients. We identified the dual phosphatase and tumor suppressor protein PTEN as an LKB1-interacting protein. Several LKB1 point mutations associated with PJS disrupt the interaction with PTEN suggesting that the loss of this interaction might contribute to PJS. Although PTEN and LKB1 are predominantly cytoplasmic and nuclear, respectively, their interaction leads to a cytoplasmic relocalization of LKB1. In addition, we show that PTEN is a substrate of the kinase LKB1 in vitro. As PTEN is a dual phosphatase mutated in autosomal inherited disorders with phenotypes similar to those of PJS (Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome and Cowden disease), our study suggests a functional link between the proteins involved in different hamartomatous polyposis syndromes and emphasizes the central role played by LKB1 as a tumor suppressor in the small intestine.",0
"Roles for E-cadherin cell surface regulation in cancer. || Animals Cadherins Cell Adhesion Cell Line, Tumor Cell Membrane Cell Movement Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic Humans Mammary Glands, Human Mice Mice, Inbred BALB C Mutation, Missense Neoplasm Metastasis Receptors, Cell Surface Signal Transduction Transcription Factors || The loss of E-cadherin expression in association with the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) occurs frequently during tumor metastasis. However, metastases often retain E-cadherin expression, an EMT is not required for metastasis, and metastases can arise from clusters of tumor cells. We demonstrate that the regulation of the adhesive activity of E-cadherin present at the cell surface by an inside-out signaling mechanism is important in cancer. First, we find that the metastasis of an E-cadherin-expressing mammary cell line from the mammary gland to the lung depends on reduced E-cadherin adhesive function. An activating monoclonal antibody to E-cadherin that induces a high adhesive state significantly reduced the number of cells metastasized to the lung without affecting the growth in size of the primary tumor in the mammary gland. Second, we find that many cancer-associated germline missense mutations in the E-cadherin gene in patients with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer selectively affect the mechanism of inside-out cell surface regulation without inhibiting basic E-cadherin adhesion function. This suggests that genetic deficits in E-cadherin cell surface regulation contribute to cancer progression. Analysis of these mutations also provides insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying cadherin regulation at the cell surface.",0
"Newborn screening for Fabry disease in Taiwan reveals a high incidence of the later-onset GLA mutation c.936+919G>A (IVS4+919G>A). ||  || Fabry disease (alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A, GLA) deficiency) is a panethnic inborn error of glycosphingolipid metabolism. Because optimal therapeutic outcomes depend on early intervention, a pilot program was designed to assess newborn screening for this disease in 171,977 consecutive Taiwanese newborns by measuring their dry blood spot (DBS) alpha-Gal A activities and beta-galactosidase/alpha-Gal A ratios. Of the 90,288 male screenees, 638 (0.7%) had DBS alpha-Gal A activity <30% of normal mean and/or activity ratios >10. A second DBS assay reduced these to 91 (0.1%). Of these, 11 (including twins) had <5% (Group-A), 64 had 5-30% (Group-B), and 11 had >30% (Group-C) of mean normal leukocyte alpha-Gal A activity. All 11 Group-A, 61 Group-B, and 1 Group-C males had GLA gene mutations. Surprisingly, 86% had the later-onset cryptic splice mutation c.936+919G>A (also called IVS4+919G>A). In contrast, screening 81,689 females detected two heterozygotes. The novel mutations were expressed in vitro, predicting their classical or later-onset phenotypes. Newborn screening identified a surprisingly high frequency of Taiwanese males with Fabry disease (approximately 1 in 1,250), 86% having the IVS4+919G>A mutation previously found in later-onset cardiac phenotype patients. Further studies of the IVS4 later-onset phenotype will determine its natural history and optimal timing for therapeutic intervention.",3 4 0
"The relationship among p53 oligomer formation, structure and transcriptional activity using a comprehensive missense mutation library. || Biopolymers Models, Molecular Mutation, Missense Protein Conformation Transcription, Genetic Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Tumor suppressor p53 forms a homo-tetramer through its COOH-terminal oligomerization domain and acts as a sequence-specific transcription factor. We have analysed the interrelation among the transcriptional activities, the structure and the cancer-related mutations in the oligomerization domain by using a comprehensive missense mutation library. Here, we examined the ability of 184 mutant p53s in the domain to form an oligomer by expressing these mutant p53s in yeast, and compared the data with the previous information. We showed that specific residues in the alpha-helix and the beta-strand of the oligomerization domain were critical for both oligomer formation and sequence-specific transactivation, and the activities were closely related. In particular, the alpha-helix was more sensitive to amino-acid substitutions than the beta-strand. We found identity in the interrelation between the two activities, that is, monomer mutants were transcriptionally inactive whereas dimer and tetramer mutants retained their transcriptional activities. In TP53 mutation databases, a small number of mutations have been reported in this domain. Surprisingly, most do not encode p53s defective in functional properties. These results indicate that, although oligomer formation is essential for p53 transactivation function, the inactivation of oligomer formation and therefore the inactivation of transactivation may not be essential for tumor suppression by p53 because they do not lead to oncogenic proteins.",0
"In vitro and in vivo correlations for I65T and M1V mutations at the phenylalanine hydroxylase locus. ||  || Mutations at the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) locus are the major cause of hyperphenylalaninemia. We have previously described four mutations (M1V, IVS12nt1, R408W, and S349P) at the PAH locus in French Canadians with ancestry in eastern Quebec. Here we report (1) identification of another mutation, on a haplotype 9 chromosome, which converts codon 65 from isoleucine (ATT) to threonine (ACT), (2) expression analysis of the I65T mutation in COS cells demonstrating 75% loss of both immunoreactive protein and enzyme activity, and (3) expression analysis of the most prevalent PKU allele (M1V) in eastern Quebec, showing nondetectable levels of PAH protein and activity, a finding compatible with a mutation in the translation initiation codon. Homozygosity for M1V and codominant inheritance of I65T/R408W were both associated with classical phenylketonuria.",1 0
"In vitro analyses of known and novel RUNX1/AML1 mutations in dominant familial platelet disorder with predisposition to acute myelogenous leukemia: implications for mechanisms of pathogenesis. || Blood Platelet Disorders Chromosomes, Human, Pair 21 Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA Mutational Analysis DNA-Binding Proteins Family Health Female Genes, Dominant Genetic Linkage Genetic Predisposition to Disease Haplotypes Humans Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute Male Pedigree Point Mutation Protein Binding Proto-Oncogene Proteins Transcription Factor AP-2 Transcription Factors Transcriptional Activation || Familial platelet disorder with predisposition to acute myelogenous leukemia (FPD/AML) is an autosomal dominant familial platelet disorder characterized by thrombocytopenia and a propensity to develop AML. Mutation analyses of RUNX1 in 3 families with FPD/AML showing linkage to chromosome 21q22.1 revealed 3 novel heterozygous point mutations (K83E, R135fsX177 (IVS4 + 3delA), and Y260X). Functional investigations of the 7 FPD/AML RUNX1 Runt domain point mutations described to date (2 frameshift, 2 nonsense, and 3 missense mutations) were performed. Consistent with the position of the mutations in the Runt domain at the RUNX1-DNA interface, DNA binding of all mutant RUNX1 proteins was absent or significantly decreased. In general, missense and nonsense RUNX1 proteins retained the ability to heterodimerize with PEBP2beta/CBFbeta and inhibited transactivation of a reporter gene by wild-type RUNX1. Colocalization of mutant RUNX1 and PEBP2beta/CBFbeta in the cytoplasm was observed. These results suggest that the sequestration of PEBP2beta/CBFbeta by mutant RUNX1 may cause the inhibitory effects. While haploinsufficiency of RUNX1 causes FPD/AML in some families (deletions and frameshifts), mutant RUNX1 proteins (missense and nonsense) may also inhibit wild-type RUNX1, possibly creating a higher propensity to develop leukemia. This is consistent with the hypothesis that a second mutation has to occur, either in RUNX1 or another gene, to cause leukemia among individuals harboring RUNX1 FPD/AML mutations and that the propensity to acquire these additional mutations is determined, at least partially, by the initial RUNX1 mutation.",2 4 0
"Gain-of-function RAF1 mutations cause Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Animals COS Cells Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Cercopithecus aethiops Humans Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins LEOPARD Syndrome Mutation, Missense Noonan Syndrome Protein Structure, Tertiary Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-raf Signal Transduction Transfection ras Proteins || Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes are developmental disorders with overlapping features, including cardiac abnormalities, short stature and facial dysmorphia. Increased RAS signaling owing to PTPN11, SOS1 and KRAS mutations causes approximately 60% of Noonan syndrome cases, and PTPN11 mutations cause 90% of LEOPARD syndrome cases. Here, we report that 18 of 231 individuals with Noonan syndrome without known mutations (corresponding to 3% of all affected individuals) and two of six individuals with LEOPARD syndrome without PTPN11 mutations have missense mutations in RAF1, which encodes a serine-threonine kinase that activates MEK1 and MEK2. Most mutations altered a motif flanking Ser259, a residue critical for autoinhibition of RAF1 through 14-3-3 binding. Of 19 subjects with a RAF1 mutation in two hotspots, 18 (or 95%) showed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), compared with the 18% prevalence of HCM among individuals with Noonan syndrome in general. Ectopically expressed RAF1 mutants from the two HCM hotspots had increased kinase activity and enhanced ERK activation, whereas non-HCM-associated mutants were kinase impaired. Our findings further implicate increased RAS signaling in pathological cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.",0
"The point mutation Arg615-->Cys in the Ca2+ release channel of skeletal sarcoplasmic reticulum is responsible for hypersensitivity to caffeine and halothane in malignant hyperthermia. || Amino Acid Sequence Animals Arginine Blotting, Western Caffeine Calcium Calcium Channels Cell Line Cysteine Drug Hypersensitivity Gene Library Halothane Intracellular Membranes Malignant Hyperthermia Mice Microsomes Muscle Proteins Muscles Point Mutation Poly A RNA RNA, Messenger Rabbits Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel Sarcoplasmic Reticulum Transfection || Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an autosomal dominant myopathy. Molecular genetic studies have shown that the alteration of Arg615 to Cys in the Ca2+ release channel of skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum (ryanodine receptor) is cosegregated with porcine MH (Fujii, J., Otsu, K., Zorzato, F., de Leon, S., Khanna, V. K., Weiler, J. E., O'Brien, P. J., and MacLennan, D. H. (1991) Science 253, 448-451; Otsu, K., Khanna, V. K., Archibald, A., and MacLennan, D. H. (1991) Genomics 11, 744-750). Here, using the fluorescence calcium indicator indo-1, we determined the concentration of ionized cytosolic calcium in myoblastic cells transfected with either the wild-type or mutated ryanodine receptor cDNA. The cells expressing the mutant ryanodine receptor showed higher sensitivity to caffeine, which induces Ca2+ release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum through the ryanodine receptor. Exposure to clinical doses of halothane resulted in a rapid increase of [Ca2+]i in cells expressing the mutated ryanodine receptor, whereas no [Ca2+] changes were observed in cells expressing the wild-type ryanodine receptor. These results provide definite evidence that a single amino acid mutation, Arg615-->Cys, in the ryanodine receptor is causative of MH.",0
"Increased ATPase activity produced by mutations at arginine-1380 in nucleotide-binding domain 2 of ABCC8 causes neonatal diabetes. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Adenosine Diphosphate Adenosine Triphosphate Amino Acid Substitution Arginine Beryllium Binding Sites Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1 Fluorides Humans Hydrolysis Infant, Newborn Insulin Insulin Secretion Ion Channel Gating Kinetics Models, Molecular Mutation, Missense Point Mutation Potassium Potassium Channels Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Protein Structure, Tertiary Receptors, Drug Structure-Activity Relationship Sulfonylurea Receptors || Gain-of-function mutations in the genes encoding the ATP-sensitive potassium (K(ATP)) channel subunits Kir6.2 (KCNJ11) and SUR1 (ABCC8) are a common cause of neonatal diabetes mellitus. Here we investigate the molecular mechanism by which two heterozygous mutations in the second nucleotide-binding domain (NBD2) of SUR1 (R1380L and R1380C) separately cause neonatal diabetes. SUR1 is a channel regulator that modulates the gating of the pore formed by Kir6.2. K(ATP) channel activity is inhibited by ATP binding to Kir6.2 but is stimulated by MgADP binding, or by MgATP binding and hydrolysis, at the NBDs of SUR1. Functional analysis of purified NBD2 showed that each mutation enhances MgATP hydrolysis by purified isolated fusion proteins of maltose-binding protein and NBD2. Inhibition of ATP hydrolysis by MgADP was unaffected by mutation of R1380, but inhibition by beryllium fluoride (which traps the ATPase cycle in the prehydrolytic state) was reduced. MgADP-dependent activation of K(ATP) channel activity was unaffected. These data suggest that the R1380L and R1380C mutations enhance the off-rate of P(i), thereby enhancing the hydrolytic rate. Molecular modeling studies supported this idea. Because mutant channels were inhibited less strongly by MgATP, this would increase K(ATP) currents in pancreatic beta cells, thus reducing insulin secretion and producing diabetes.",0
"Structural, Functional, and Clinical Characterization of a Novel PTPN11 Mutation Cluster Underlying Noonan Syndrome. || Genetic Predisposition to Disease HEK293 Cells Humans MAP Kinase Signaling System Models, Molecular Mutation Mutation, Missense Noonan Syndrome Protein Binding Protein Domains Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 src Homology Domains || Germline mutations in PTPN11, the gene encoding the Src-homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase (SHP2), cause Noonan syndrome (NS), a relatively common, clinically variable, multisystem disorder. Here, we report on the identification of five different PTPN11 missense changes affecting residues Leu261 , Leu262 , and Arg265 in 16 unrelated individuals with clinical diagnosis of NS or with features suggestive for this disorder, specifying a novel disease-causing mutation cluster. Expression of the mutant proteins in HEK293T cells documented their activating role on MAPK signaling. Structural data predicted a gain-of-function role of substitutions at residues Leu262 and Arg265 exerted by disruption of the N-SH2/PTP autoinhibitory interaction. Molecular dynamics simulations suggested a more complex behavior for changes affecting Leu261 , with possible impact on SHP2's catalytic activity/selectivity and proper interaction of the PTP domain with the regulatory SH2 domains. Consistent with that, biochemical data indicated that substitutions at codons 262 and 265 increased the catalytic activity of the phosphatase, while those affecting codon 261 were only moderately activating but impacted substrate specificity. Remarkably, these mutations underlie a relatively mild form of NS characterized by low prevalence of cardiac defects, short stature, and cognitive and behavioral issues, as well as less evident typical facial features.",0
"β-Myosin heavy chain variant Val606Met causes very mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in mice, but exacerbates HCM phenotypes in mice carrying other HCM mutations. || Amino Acid Substitution Animals Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Cyclosporine Disease Models, Animal Gene Knock-In Techniques Genotype Humans Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular Mice Models, Molecular Mutation, Missense Myocardial Contraction Myosin Heavy Chains Phenotype Point Mutation Protein Conformation Transcription, Genetic Ultrasonography Ventricular Myosins Ventricular Remodeling || Approximately 40% of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is caused by heterozygous missense mutations in β-cardiac myosin heavy chain (β-MHC). Associating disease phenotype with mutation is confounded by extensive background genetic and lifestyle/environmental differences between subjects even from the same family. To characterize disease caused by β-cardiac myosin heavy chain Val606Met substitution (VM) that has been identified in several HCM families with wide variation of clinical outcomes, in mice. Unlike 2 mouse lines bearing the malignant myosin mutations Arg453Cys (RC/+) or Arg719Trp (RW/+), VM/+ mice with an identical inbred genetic background lacked hallmarks of HCM such as left ventricular hypertrophy, disarray of myofibers, and interstitial fibrosis. Even homozygous VM/VM mice were indistinguishable from wild-type animals, whereas RC/RC- and RW/RW-mutant mice died within 9 days after birth. However, hypertrophic effects of the VM mutation were observed both in mice treated with cyclosporine, a known stimulator of the HCM response, and compound VM/RC heterozygous mice, which developed a severe HCM phenotype. In contrast to all heterozygous mutants, both systolic and diastolic function of VM/RC hearts was severely impaired already before the onset of cardiac remodeling. The VM mutation per se causes mild HCM-related phenotypes; however, in combination with other HCM activators it exacerbates the HCM phenotype. Double-mutant mice are suitable for assessing the severity of benign mutations.",0
"Germline mutations of the E-cadherin(CDH1) and TP53 genes, rather than of RUNX3 and HPP1, contribute to genetic predisposition in German gastric cancer patients. || Animals CHO Cells Cadherins Core Binding Factor Alpha 3 Subunit Cricetinae Cricetulus DNA DNA Mutational Analysis DNA-Binding Proteins Family Health Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Immunohistochemistry Male Membrane Proteins Neoplasm Proteins Pedigree Stomach Neoplasms Transcription Factors Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || ",4 0
"Glucokinase thermolability and hepatic regulatory protein binding are essential factors for predicting the blood glucose phenotype of missense mutations. || Amino Acid Substitution Animals Blood Glucose Carrier Proteins Enzyme Activation Enzyme Stability Glucokinase Glucose Metabolism Disorders Hot Temperature Insulin Insulin Secretion Liver Mice Mice, Mutant Strains Mice, Transgenic Mutation, Missense Phenotype Protein Binding Recombinant Proteins || To better understand how glucokinase (GK) missense mutations associated with human glycemic diseases perturb glucose homeostasis, we generated and characterized mice with either an activating (A456V) or inactivating (K414E) mutation in the gk gene. Animals with these mutations exhibited alterations in their blood glucose concentration that were inversely related to the relative activity index of GK. Moreover, the threshold for glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from islets with either the activating or inactivating mutation were left- or right-shifted, respectively. However, we were surprised to find that mice with the activating mutation had markedly reduced amounts of hepatic GK activity. Further studies of bacterially expressed mutant enzymes revealed that GK(A456V) is as stable as the wild type enzyme, whereas GK(K414E) is thermolabile. However, the ability of GK regulatory protein to inhibit GK(A456V) was found to be less than that of the wild type enzyme, a finding consistent with impaired hepatic nuclear localization. Taken together, this study indicates that it is necessary to have knowledge of both thermolability and the interactions of mutant GK enzymes with GK regulatory protein when attempting to predict in vivo glycemic phenotypes based on the measurement of enzyme kinetics.",0
"Structure/function studies of human beta-cell glucokinase. Enzymatic properties of a sequence polymorphism, mutations associated with diabetes, and other site-directed mutants. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Cloning, Molecular DNA, Single-Stranded Diabetes Mellitus Escherichia coli Glucokinase Hexokinase Humans Islets of Langerhans Molecular Sequence Data Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation Polymorphism, Genetic Protein Conformation Saccharomyces cerevisiae Substrate Specificity || Glucokinase plays a key role in the regulation of glucose metabolism in insulin-secreting pancreatic beta-cells and in the liver. Recent studies have shown that mutations in this enzyme can lead to the development of a form of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus that is characterized by an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance and onset during childhood. Here, we report the catalytic properties of five additional missense mutations associated with diabetes (Glu70-->Lys, Ser131-->Pro, Ala188-->Thr, Trp257-->Arg and Lys414-->Glu), one polymorphism present in both normal and diabetic subjects (Asp4-->Asn), and three site-directed mutations (Glu177-->Lys, Glu256-->Ala, and Lys414-->Ala). The Trp257-->Arg mutation generated an enzyme that had an activity that was less than 0.5% of that for native human beta-cell glucokinase. By contrast, the Glu70-->Lys, Ser131-->Pro, Ala188-->Thr, and Lys414-->Glu mutations had a Vmax that was 20-100% of normal but a Km for glucose that was 8-14-fold greater than the native enzyme. There was no effect of the Asp4-->Asn polymorphism or the Glu177-->Lys substitution on glucokinase activity. The Lys414-->Ala substitution had no effect on Vmax but increased the Km for glucose 2-fold and the Glu256-->Ala substitution caused a approximately 200-fold decrease in Vmax. These studies have led to the identification of additional residues involved in glucokinase catalysis and substrate binding.",0
"Usher syndrome type 1 due to missense mutations on both CDH23 alleles: investigation of mRNA splicing. ||  || Usher syndrome (USH) is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by sensorineural hearing loss, vestibular dysfunction, and visual impairment due to retinitis pigmentosa. Truncating mutations in the cadherin-23 gene (CDH23) result in Usher syndrome type 1D (USH1D), whereas missense mutations affecting strongly conserved motifs of the CDH23 protein cause non-syndromic deafness (DFNB12). Four missense mutations constitute an exception from this genotype-phenotype correlation: they have been described in USH1 patients in homozygous state. Using a minigene assay, we have investigated these changes (c.1450G>C, p.A484P; c.3625A>G, p.T1209A; c.4520G>A, p.R1507Q; and c.5237G>A, p.R1746Q) for a possible impact on mRNA splicing which could explain the syndromic phenotype. While in silico analysis suggested impairment of splicing in all four cases, we found aberrant splicing for only one mutation, p.R1746Q. However, splicing was normal in case of p.A484P, p.T1209A and p.R1507Q. These three latter CDH23 missense mutations could interfere with functions of both, the auditory and the visual system. Alternatively, they could represent rare non-pathogenic polymorphisms.",0
"[In vitro expression and structural analysis of four missense mutations (G247S, E280G, P362T, A434D) of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene]. ||  || To understand the pathogenic effect and the correlation between the genotype and phenotype of the 4 novel missense mutations (G247S, E280G, P362T and A434D) of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH). (1) The enzyme activity of the 4 mutants was assessed by using transient protein expression in mammalian cells. (2) The PAH amino acid sequences among different animal species were alignmented. (3) The effects of the 4 missense mutations on the protein structure were analyzed. (4) The clinical phenotype of the patients with PKU were analyzed, according to their blood Phe levels prior to treatment and the Phe tolerance. (1) The residual enzyme activity expressed in vitro of G247S, E280G, P362T and A434D were 3.1%, 0.4%, 8.2% and 21.7% of the wild-type PAH respectively; (2)Gly247, Glu280 and Pro362 were among the highly conserved amino acids, while Ala434 was only moderately conserved; (3) As revealed by 3D structural analysis, G247S and E280G, being located at the active center of the enzyme, interfered with the binding of PAH to BH4 and ferrousion respectively, while P362T and A434D affected the formation and stability of the dimer and the tetramer of PAH; (4) As shown by clinical phenotypic analysis, classical PKU were observed in patients carrying G247S and E280G, moderate PKU were observed in patients carrying A434D, whereas both classical and moderate PKU were observed in patients carrying P362T. (1) The E280G, G247S, P362T and A434D are all disease-causing mutations, with those located at the center of the enzyme displaying the most marked pathogenic effect; (2)The results of the structural analysis of the 3D molecule are consistent with the activity assessment of the enzyme expressed in vitro; (3) The consistency is observed between the genotype, the enzymatic activity expressed in vitro and the clinical phenotype.",0
"Different splicing defects lead to differential effects downstream of the lipid and protein phosphatase activities of PTEN. || Breast Neoplasms Exons Genes, Tumor Suppressor Humans Lipid Metabolism Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Phosphorylation Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Proto-Oncogene Proteins Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt RNA Splicing Tumor Cells, Cultured Tumor Suppressor Proteins || PTEN, encoding a dual phosphatase tumor suppressor, is mutated in 85 and 65% of individuals with Cowden syndrome (CS) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS), respectively. Approximately 23 germline mutations in putative splice sites have been published, but resulting downstream outcome data are limited. We determined splicing defects in PTEN in 40 germline PTEN mutation positive cases and 33 mutation negative cases with classic CS, BRRS and CS- or BRRS-like features. Altered splicing was observed in 4/40 mutation positive probands and 2/33 mutation negative probands. We then sought to characterize the transcriptional and biochemical outcomes of the five distinct splice-site mutations, which led to the skipping of exon 3, 4 or 6. Two mutation negative BRRS patients also showed exon 3 skipping, and later, genomic sequencing revealed a mutation deep in intron 2. The splice-site mutations leading to the deletions of exon 3, 4 or 6 resulted in reduced dual phosphatase activities of PTEN. Deletion of exon 4 was associated with severely reduced lipid phosphatase activity, whereas exon 3 skipping resulted in markedly reduced protein phosphatase activity. In addition, exon 3 deleted transcript and protein were stable and localized to the nucleus more efficiently than the wild-type PTEN. In contrast, exon 4 skipping resulted in unstable transcripts and severely truncated unstable PTEN protein lacking its phosphatase domain. We have not only described for the first time, the effect of a deep intronic/branch-site mutation on exon skipping in PTEN but also found that different splice-site mutations resulting in the deletion of different exons lead to distinct outcomes.",0
"Inactivation of phenylalanine hydroxylase by a missense mutation, R270S, in a Palestinian kinship with phenylketonuria. || Base Sequence DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Ethnic Groups Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction || ",3 0
"Glycogenosis type II: identification and expression of three novel mutations in the acid alpha-glucosidase gene causing the infantile form of the disease. || Animals COS Cells Cells, Cultured Cercopithecus aethiops Endoplasmic Reticulum Female Fibroblasts Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Golgi Apparatus Humans Infant Mutation Skin alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogenosis type II (GSDII) is an autosomal recessive disorder due to the deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA). We identified three novel point mutations, C399A, T1064C, and C2104T, in three unrelated Italian patients with the infantile form of the disease. The C399A mutation was present in homozygosity in proband 1. The C >A transition introduces a premature stop signal in exon 2 resulting in no enzyme production that is correlated with the severe clinical phenotype in this patient. The other two nucleotide changes were missense mutations. The T1064C mutation, which changes Leu in position 355 into Pro, was carried in homozygosity by proband 2. The C2104T nucleotide change, which substitutes Arg 702 into Cys, was present in proband 3 in combination with a known severe mutation DeltaI17-18. The in vitro expression in COS-1 cells of T1064C and C2104T constructs demonstrated no enzymatic activity with respect to the negative control cells. Western blot analysis revealed that both T1064C and C2104T mutant proteins produced in COS-1 cells migrated in SDS-PAGE as the GAA inactive precursor of 110kDa. Immunofluorescence detection of mutant alpha-glucosidases showed enzyme localization primarily in the ER-Golgi compartment, suggesting that T1064C and C2104T mutations could affect the normal processing and stability of the enzyme. In vitro studies demonstrated that the same degree of deficiency in T1064C and C2104T mutations, which is in contrast with patient phenotype. A better correlation was observed with the in vivo studies since proband 2, with a less severe phenotype, presented with low residual enzyme activity while in proband 3, with a classic severe infantile onset GSDII, fibroblast enzyme activity was completely absent.",1 0
"Alpha-Galactosidase A p.A143T, a non-Fabry disease-causing variant. || Adult Fabry Disease Female Genotype Humans Ischemic Attack, Transient Male Middle Aged Mutation Mutation, Missense Retrospective Studies Stroke alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked multisystemic disorder with a heterogeneous phenotype. Especially atypical or late-onset type 2 phenotypes present a therapeutical dilemma. To determine the clinical impact of the alpha-Galactosidase A (GLA) p.A143T/ c.427G > A variation, we retrospectively analyzed 25 p.A143T patients in comparison to 58 FD patients with other missense mutations. p.A143T patients suffering from stroke/ transient ischemic attacks had slightly decreased residual GLA activities, and/or increased lyso-Gb3 levels, suspecting FD. However, most male p.A143T patients presented with significant residual GLA activity (~50 % of reference), which was associated with normal lyso-Gb3 levels. Additionally, p.A143T patients showed less severe FD-typical symptoms and absent FD-typical renal and cardiac involvement in comparison to FD patients with other missense mutations. Two tested female p.A143T patients with stroke/TIA did not show skewed X chromosome inactivation. No accumulation of neurologic events in family members of p.A143T patients with stroke/transient ischemic attacks was observed. We conclude that GLA p.A143T seems to be most likely a neutral variant or a possible modifier instead of a disease-causing mutation. Therefore, we suggest that p.A143T patients with stroke/transient ischemic attacks of unknown etiology should be further evaluated, since the diagnosis of FD is not probable and subsequent ERT or chaperone treatment should not be an unreflected option.",2 0 3
"A mutant cardiac sodium channel with multiple biophysical defects associated with overlapping clinical features of Brugada syndrome and cardiac conduction disease. || Analysis of Variance Arrhythmias, Cardiac Bundle-Branch Block Cell Line Electrocardiography Heart Conduction System Humans Ion Channel Gating Mutation Myocardium Patch-Clamp Techniques Sodium Channels Syndrome || Loss of Na(+) channel function has been implicated in idiopathic ventricular fibrillation (IVF) and Brugada syndrome. We have studied the biophysical properties of an IVF mutation (S1710L) that exhibited an unusual clinical phenotype: rate-dependent bundle branch block without manifestation of Brugada-type ECG pattern. The mutant S1710L channels were expressed in mammalian cells and their gating properties, studied using whole-cell patch clamp techniques, were compared with wild-type (WT) and a Brugada syndrome mutant channel T1620M. The S1710L channel exhibited significantly faster macroscopic current decay than WT or T1620M. In addition, S1710L showed a negative shift in the voltage-dependence of fast inactivation and slower recovery from fast inactivation than in WT or T1620M. In addition to the alterations in fast inactivation most commonly observed in Brugada syndrome mutations, S1710L exhibited marked enhancement in slow inactivation and a large positive shift of activation that potentially decreases conduction velocity. These functional abnormalities may be responsible for the overlapping clinical phenotypes associated with Brugada syndrome and the cardiac conduction defect, a novel cardiac Na(+) channelopathy.",0
"Novel COCH p.V123E Mutation, Causative of DFNA9 Sensorineural Hearing Loss and Vestibular Disorder, Shows Impaired Cochlin Post-Translational Cleavage and Secretion. || Adult Amino Acid Sequence Amino Acid Substitution Cell Line Codon Extracellular Matrix Proteins Genes, Dominant Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Hearing Tests High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Magnetic Resonance Imaging Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Protein Multimerization Protein Processing, Post-Translational Protein Transport Proteolysis Tomography, X-Ray Computed Vestibular Diseases || DFNA9 is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by late-onset, non-syndromic hearing loss, and vestibular dysfunction. Mutations in the COCH (coagulation factor C homology) gene encoding cochlin are etiologically linked to DFNA9. Previous studies have shown that cochlin is cleaved by aggrecanase-1 during inflammation in the spleen and that the cleaved LCCL domain functions as an innate immune mediator. However, the physiological role of cochlin in the inner ear is not completely understood. Here, we report that cochlins containing DFNA9-linked mutations (p.P51S, p.V66G, p.G88E, p.I109T, p.W117R, p.V123E, and p.C162Y) demonstrate reduced cleavage by aggrecanase. Notably, in families affected with DFNA9, we found a novel COCH mutation causing p.V123E substitution in cochlin, which significantly reduced protein susceptibility to cleavage by aggrecanase (to about 20.5% of the wild-type). These results suggest that the impaired post-translational cleavage of cochlin mutants may be associated with pathological mechanisms underlying DFNA9-related sensorineural hearing loss.",0
"Spectrum of mutations in Noonan syndrome and their correlation with phenotypes. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Diagnosis, Differential Female Humans Infant Male Molecular Diagnostic Techniques Mutation Noonan Syndrome Phenotype Young Adult || To investigate mutation spectrums and their correlations to phenotypes in Noonan syndrome (NS) and NS-related disorders that share functional alterations of the Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. Clinical characteristics and genotypes of 10 previously known and 2 candidate genes, SPRY1-4 and SPRED1, were investigated in 59 patients with NS, 17 with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome, 5 with Costello syndrome, and 2 with LEOPARD syndrome. PTPN11 (39.0%), SOS1 (20.3%), RAF1 (6.8%), KRAS (5.1%), and BRAF (1.7%) mutations were identified in NS; BRAF (41.2%), SHOC2 (23.5%), and MEK1 (5.9%) mutations in cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome; and HRAS and PTPN11 mutations in Costello syndrome and LEOPARD syndrome, respectively. No additional mutations were identified in 28.9% of NS and 35.3% of cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome. Functional characterizations of 2 RAF1 novel variants, p.P261T and p.S259T, and one SOS1 variant, p.K170E, showed enhanced activity of Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. Normal stature was frequent in SOS1 mutations, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in RAF1, and developmental delay in RAF1, BRAF, or SHOC2 mutations. By identifying genotype-phenotype correlations, our study highlights the role of molecular genetic testing in the process of differential diagnosis of NS and NS-related disorders. Pathophysiologies that underlie these correlations are needed to be investigated in terms of their effects on Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.",0
"Global defects in the expression and function of the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) associated with two familial hypercholesterolemia mutations resulting in misfolding of the LDLR epidermal growth factor-AB pair. || Binding Sites Blotting, Western Calcium Cell Line Cell Membrane Chelating Agents Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Epidermal Growth Factor Flow Cytometry Humans Hydrogen-Ion Concentration Hypercholesterolemia Kinetics Ligands Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy Models, Molecular Mutation Plasmids Protein Binding Protein Folding Protein Structure, Secondary Protein Structure, Tertiary Receptors, LDL Time Factors || The low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor is a modular protein involved in the endocytosis of cholesterol-rich lipoproteins from the circulation. Mutations to the receptor result in familial hypercholesterolemia, and over 60 of these occur in the calcium-binding epidermal growth factor-like domain pair. Two selected mutations in this region (G322S and R329P) were introduced into the domain pair and analyzed by in vitro refolding. Both exhibited differing levels of protein misfolding with R329P being the most pronounced. Solution NMR studies of the mutant domain pairs after purification established that a fraction of protein maintains a native-like fold and that this fraction contains two intact calcium-binding sites. An in vivo analysis of intact receptors containing these binding sites showed significantly reduced cell-surface expression compared with the native LDL receptor levels, again with R329P showing the most severe decrease. The sum of these results suggests that either local changes in structure or domain misfolding may be associated with the mutations. There is also the possibility that the misfolding of the calcium-binding epidermal growth factor-like pair region is propagated to other regions of the intact receptor, resulting in more global defects. Surprisingly, for both mutants, those full-length receptors that fold and reach the cell surface retain the ability to bind LDL and release the ligand upon exposure to low pH. This analysis provides significant insight into the protein defect resulting from each of the two mutations and allows their classification to be 2B (partially transport-defective). The results also highlight a range of misfolding defects that may be associated with familial hypercholesterolemia and may enable the prediction of the consequences of homologous disease-causing mutations to other proteins.",0
"Prevalence and functional consequence of TP53 mutations in pediatric adrenocortical carcinoma: a children's oncology group study. || Adolescent Adrenal Cortex Neoplasms Adrenocortical Carcinoma Adult Age Factors Alleles Carcinogenesis Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Family Health Female Genes, p53 Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Male Neoplasm Staging Penetrance Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Young Adult || Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a rare pediatric malignancy. It occurs in excess among individuals with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, which results primarily from germline mutations in the TP53 gene. Prior series exploring frequencies of germline TP53 mutation among children with ACC have been small, geographically limited, or subject to referral bias. The functional consequence of mutations has not been related to phenotype. We provide a genotype-phenotype analysis of TP53 mutations in pediatric ACC and propose a model for tissue-specific effects based on adrenocortical ontogeny. Eighty-eight consecutive, unrelated children with ACC, unselected for family history, underwent germline TP53 sequencing. Rate and distribution of mutations were identified. Functional analysis was performed for novel TP53 variants. Correlation with the International Agency for Research on Cancer p53 database further delineated mutational distribution, association with family history, and risk for multiple primary malignancies (MPMs). Germline mutations were present in 50% of children. These mutations did not correspond to the conventional hotspot mutations. There was a wide range of mutant protein function. Patients bearing alleles encoding protein with higher functionality were less likely to have a strong family cancer history, whereas those with greater loss of function had MPMs and/or positive family history. In patients with MPMs, ACC was the most frequent initial malignancy. Finally, we demonstrated age-dependent rates of TP53 mutation positivity. TP53 mutations are prevalent in children with ACC but decline with age. Mutations result in a broad spectrum of functional loss. Effect of individual mutations may predict carrier and familial disease penetrance with potentially broad implications for clinical surveillance and counseling.",3 4 0
"A structural systems biology approach for quantifying the systemic consequences of missense mutations in proteins. || Computer Simulation G2 Phase Cell Cycle Checkpoints Humans MAP Kinase Signaling System Models, Molecular Mutation, Missense Protein Stability Proteins Systems Biology || Gauging the systemic effects of non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) is an important topic in the pursuit of personalized medicine. However, it is a non-trivial task to understand how a change at the protein structure level eventually affects a cell's behavior. This is because complex information at both the protein and pathway level has to be integrated. Given that the idea of integrating both protein and pathway dynamics to estimate the systemic impact of missense mutations in proteins remains predominantly unexplored, we investigate the practicality of such an approach by formulating mathematical models and comparing them with experimental data to study missense mutations. We present two case studies: (1) interpreting systemic perturbation for mutations within the cell cycle control mechanisms (G2 to mitosis transition) for yeast; (2) phenotypic classification of neuron-related human diseases associated with mutations within the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. We show that the application of simplified mathematical models is feasible for understanding the effects of small sequence changes on cellular behavior. Furthermore, we show that the systemic impact of missense mutations can be effectively quantified as a combination of protein stability change and pathway perturbation.",0
"Pharmacological characterization of 40 human melanocortin-4 receptor polymorphisms with the endogenous proopiomelanocortin-derived agonists and the agouti-related protein (AGRP) antagonist. || Adult Agouti-Related Protein Amino Acid Sequence Cell Line Child Humans Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Molecular Sequence Data Mutagenesis Polymorphism, Genetic Proteins Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Transfection || The melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) is a G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) that is expressed in the central nervous system and has a role in regulating energy homeostasis and obesity. Up to a remarkable 6% of morbidly obese adults and children studied possess single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the MC4R. Upon stimulation by agonist, the MC4R signals through the intracellular adenylate cyclase signal transduction pathway. Posttranslational modification of the pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) gene transcript results in the generation of several endogenous melanocortin receptor agonists including alpha-, beta-, gamma-melanocyte stimulating hormones (MSH) and adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) ligands. The endogenous MC4R antagonist, agouti-related protein (AGRP), is expressed in the brain and is only one of two naturally occurring antagonists of GPCRs identified to date. Herein, we have generated 40 hMC4 polymorphic receptors and evaluated their cell surface expression by flow cytometry as well as pharmacologically characterized their functionality using the endogenous agonists alpha-MSH, beta-MSH, gamma2-MSH, ACTH(1-24), the antagonist hAGRP(87-132), and the synthetic agonists NDP-MSH and MTII. This is the first study in which polymorphic hMC4Rs have been pharmacologically characterized simultaneously with multiple endogenous ligands. Interestingly, at the N97D, L106P, and C271Y hMC4Rs beta-MSH was more potent than the other endogenous agonists alpha-MSH, gamma2-MSH, ACTH(1-24). The S58C and R165Q/W hMC4Rs possessed significantly reduced endogenous agonist potency (15- to 90-fold), but the synthetic ligands NDP-MSH and MTII possessed only 2-9-fold reduced potency as compared to the wild-type receptor, suggesting their potential as therapeutic ligands to treat individuals with these polymorphisms.",0
"[In vitro expression study of novel mutations in phenylalanine hydroxylase gene]. ||  || To study the in vitro expression of 6 novel missense mutations (R270G, P275A, F121L, A156P, E183G, I324N) and a previously described R408Q mutation of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene and explore the genotype-phenotype correlation through comparison of protein levels and residual enzyme activities. Seven expression vectors containing PAH cDNA were constructed with a site-directed mutagenesis kit. The plasmids were extracted and sequenced to confirm the target mutations. pcDNA3.0 containing PAH cDNA was transfected into COS-7 cells and total proteins were extracted 48 h after transfection. The quantities of proteins and residual enzyme activities of the 7 mutants were assessed with the wild-type PAH gene as reference. Relative quantities of PAH proteins for R270G, P275A, F121L, A156P, E183G, I324N and R408Q were 10.5%, 56.6%, 54.3%, 8.7%, 8.5%, 67.3% and 85.4%, respectively. The residual enzyme activities were 7.7%, 27.6%, 19.0%, 10.4%, 9.1%, 50.6% and 40.2%, respectively. PAH residual enzyme activities of 7 PAH mutants were all significantly reduced.",1 0
"To die or not to die: how does p53 decide? || Animals Apoptosis Genes, p53 Humans Mutation Neoplasms Organ Specificity Transcription, Genetic Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || p53 is frequently mutated in cancer and as a result is one of the most intensely studied tumour suppressors. Analysis of the primitive forms of p53 found in Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila, alongside studies using transgenic mouse models, indicate that the induction of apoptosis is both the most conserved function of p53 and vital for tumour suppression. p53-mediated apoptosis occurs through a combination of mechanisms which include pathways that are both dependent and independent of alterations in gene expression. In response to genotoxic insult, these pathways probably act together, thereby amplifying the apoptotic signal. However, the picture is complicated because the p53 activity is determined by stress type and individual cellular characteristics. The numerous p53 responsive genes that have been identified also provide further means of controlling the actions of p53. The recent discoveries of proteins that interact with p53 and specifically regulate the ability of p53 to trigger apoptosis have provided further mechanistic insights into the role of p53 in inducing cell death. Understanding the molecular basis of the proapoptotic action of p53 can assist in our quest to reintroduce or reactivate p53 in human tumours.",0
"Tailor-Made Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases: In Vitro Site-Directed Mutagenesis of PTEN and PTPRZ-B. || PCR PTEN PTPRZ-B PTPRZ1 Protein tyrosine phosphatase Site-directed mutagenesis || In vitro site-directed mutagenesis (SDM) of protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) is a commonly used approach to experimentally analyze PTP functions at the molecular and cellular level and to establish functional correlations with PTP alterations found in human disease. Here, using the tumor-suppressor PTEN and the receptor-type PTPRZ-B (short isoform from PTPRZ1 gene) phosphatases as examples, we provide a brief insight into the utility of specific mutations in the experimental analysis of PTP functions. We describe a standardized, rapid, and simple method of mutagenesis to perform single and multiple amino acid substitutions, as well as deletions of short nucleotide sequences, based on one-step inverse PCR and DpnI restriction enzyme treatment. This method of SDM is generally applicable to any other protein of interest.",0
"Increased BRAF heterodimerization is the common pathogenic mechanism for noonan syndrome-associated RAF1 mutants. || Animals Cells, Cultured Enzyme Activation Female Gene Knock-In Techniques Humans MAP Kinase Signaling System Male Mice Mice, Inbred C57BL Models, Molecular Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Noonan Syndrome Phenotype Point Mutation Protein Multimerization Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-raf || Noonan syndrome (NS) is a relatively common autosomal dominant disorder characterized by congenital heart defects, short stature, and facial dysmorphia. NS is caused by germ line mutations in several components of the RAS-RAF-MEK-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, including both kinase-activating and kinase-impaired alleles of RAF1 (∼3 to 5%), which encodes a serine-threonine kinase for MEK1/2. To investigate how kinase-impaired RAF1 mutants cause NS, we generated knock-in mice expressing Raf1(D486N). Raf1(D486N/+) (here D486N/+) female mice exhibited a mild growth defect. Male and female D486N/D486N mice developed concentric cardiac hypertrophy and incompletely penetrant, but severe, growth defects. Remarkably, Mek/Erk activation was enhanced in Raf1(D486N)-expressing cells compared with controls. RAF1(D486N), as well as other kinase-impaired RAF1 mutants, showed increased heterodimerization with BRAF, which was necessary and sufficient to promote increased MEK/ERK activation. Furthermore, kinase-activating RAF1 mutants also required heterodimerization to enhance MEK/ERK activation. Our results suggest that an increased heterodimerization ability is the common pathogenic mechanism for NS-associated RAF1 mutations.",0
"Molecular and functional characterization of eight novel GAA mutations in Italian infants with Pompe disease. ||  || We characterized 29 unrelated patients presenting with the severe form of Pompe disease (Glycogen Storage Disease Type II, acid maltase deficiency) and identified 26 pathogenic mutations divided over 28 different genotypes. Among the eight new mutations, five were exonic point mutations (c.572A>G, c.1124G>T, c.1202A>G, c.1564C>G and c.1796C>A) leading to codon changes (p.Y191C, p.R375L, p.Q401R, p.P522A and p.S599Y); two were intronic point mutations (c.-32-3C>A and c.1636+5G>C) affecting mRNA processing; one was a single base deletion (c.742delC) generating a truncated protein (p.L248PfsX20). A comprehensive evaluation, based on different methodological approaches, confirmed the detrimental effect of the eight mutations on the protein and its function. Structural alterations potentially induced by the five missense mutations were also predicted through visual inspection of the atomic model of the GAA protein, in terms of both function and spatial orientation of specific residues as well as disturbance generated by amino acid substitutions. Although the remarkable heterogeneity of the mutational spectrum in Pompe disease was already known, our data demonstrate and confirm the power of molecular and functional analysis in predicting the natural course of Pompe disease.",1 4 0
"Functional analysis, using in vitro mutagenesis, of amino acids located in the phenylalanine hydroxylase active site. || Amino Acids Animals Binding Sites Biopterin Kinetics Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Protein Binding Protein Structure, Secondary Rats Structure-Activity Relationship || The 3-dimensional structure determination of rat phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) has identified potentially important amino acids lining the active site cleft with the majority of these having hydrophobic side-chains including several with aromatic side chains. Here we have analyzed the effect on rat PAH enzyme kinetics of in vitro mutagenesis of a number of these amino acids lining the PAH active site. Mutation of F299, Y324, F331, and Y343 caused a significant decrease in enzyme activity but no change in the Km for substrate or cofactor. We conclude that these aromatic residues are essential for activity but are not significantly involved in binding of the substrate or cofactor. In contrast the PAH mutant, S349T, showed an 18-fold increase in Km for phenylalanine, showing the first functional evidence that this residue was binding at or near the phenylalanine binding site. This confirms the recently published model for the binding of phenylalanine to the PAH active site that postulated S349 interacts with the amino group on the main chain of the phenylalanine molecule. This result differs with that found for the equivalent mutation (S395T), in the closely related tyrosine hydroxylase, which had no effect on substrate Km, showing that while the architecture of the two active sites are very similar the amino acids that bind to the respective substrates are different.",0
"Mutation screen and RNA analysis disclose the changed splicing of the E-cadherin transcription in gastric cancer. || Adenocarcinoma Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Antigens, CD Base Sequence Cadherins Case-Control Studies Exons Female Follow-Up Studies Gene Deletion Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Neoplasm Grading Neoplasm Recurrence, Local Prognosis RNA Splicing Stomach Neoplasms || Gastric cancer (GC) is considered to be one of the leading cancers in East Asians, and mutations in the CDH1 gene and the reduced expression of E-cadherin are the most frequent genetic alterations in gastric cancer. In this paper, we reported two novel germline CDH1 nonsynonymous mutations, c.1296 C>G (N432 K) and c.1297 G>A (D433 N) detected in sporadic Chinese GC patients. RNA splicing analysis was used to evaluate mutations' effects on E-cadherin transcription and exon definition. We revealed that the c.1296 C>G (N432 K) variant can generate the E-cadherin exon9-skipping and may be a disease-causing mutation, while the c.1297 G>A (D433 N) mutation not. Moreover, we demonstrated the E-cadherin 1054del83 transcript is a frequent event in Chinese GC patients.",4 0
"A nonsense mutation in the acid α-glucosidase gene causes Pompe disease in Finnish and Swedish Lapphunds. || Animals Codon, Nonsense Dogs Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Male Pedigree Species Specificity alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is a recessively inherited and often fatal disorder caused by the deficiency of acid α-glucosidase, an enzyme encoded by the GAA gene and needed to break down glycogen in lysosomes. This glycogen storage disease type II has been reported also in Swedish Lapphund dogs. Here we describe the genetic defect in canine Pompe disease and show that three related breeds from Scandinavia carry the same mutation. The affected dogs are homozygous for the GAA c.2237G>A mutation leading to a premature stop codon at amino acid position 746. The corresponding mutation has previously been reported in humans and causes infantile Pompe disease in combination with a second fully deleterious mutation. The affected dogs from both the Finnish as well as the Swedish breed mimic infantile-onset Pompe disease genetically, but also clinico-pathologically. Therefore this canine model provides a valuable tool for preclinical studies aimed at the development of gene therapy in Pompe disease.",0
"Molecular basis of gain-of-function LEOPARD syndrome-associated SHP2 mutations. || Enzyme Activation HEK293 Cells Humans Kinetics LEOPARD Syndrome Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 1 Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 3 Models, Molecular Mutation Protein Conformation Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 src Homology Domains || The Src homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 2 (SHP2) is a critical signal transducer downstream of growth factors that promotes the activation of the RAS-ERK1/2 cascade. In its basal state, SHP2 exists in an autoinhibited closed conformation because of an intramolecular interaction between its N-SH2 and protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) domains. Binding to pTyr ligands present on growth factor receptors and adaptor proteins with its N-SH2 domain localizes SHP2 to its substrates and frees the active site from allosteric inhibition. Germline mutations in SHP2 are known to cause both Noonan syndrome (NS) and LEOPARD syndrome (LS), two clinically similar autosomal dominant developmental disorders. NS-associated SHP2 mutants display elevated phosphatase activity, while LS-associated SHP2 mutants exhibit reduced catalytic activity. A conundrum in how clinically similar diseases result from mutations to SHP2 that have opposite effects on this enzyme's catalytic functionality exists. Here we report a comprehensive investigation of the kinetic, structural, dynamic, and biochemical signaling properties of the wild type as well as all reported LS-associated SHP2 mutants. The results reveal that LS-causing mutations not only affect SHP2 phosphatase activity but also induce a weakening of the intramolecular interaction between the N-SH2 and PTP domains, leading to mutants that are more readily activated by competing pTyr ligands. Our data also indicate that the residual phosphatase activity associated with the LS SHP2 mutant is required for enhanced ERK1/2 activation. Consequently, catalytically impaired SHP2 mutants could display gain-of-function properties because of their ability to localize to the vicinity of substrates for longer periods of time, thereby affording the opportunity for prolonged substrate turnover and sustained RAS-ERK1/2 activation.",0
"Juvenile-onset glycogen storage disease type II with novel mutations in acid alpha-glucosidase gene. || Adolescent Amino Acid Substitution Asian Continental Ancestry Group DNA Mutational Analysis Enzyme Activation Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Heterozygote Humans Male Mutation, Missense Penetrance Siblings alpha-Glucosidases || The authors describe two novel mutations of the acid alpha-glucosidase gene, P361L and R437C, which define the juvenile-onset glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII) in a 16-year-old Chinese patient. The asymptomatic 13-year-old brother of the proband is also a compound heterozygote of the two mutations. These results confirm that intrafamilial phenotypic variation of juvenile-onset GSDII is ethnically diverse and suggest the contribution of other genes to the phenotypic variability of GSDII.",1 0
"p53 compound heterozygosity in a severely affected child with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. || Adult Cell Division Child Child, Preschool Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p21 Cyclins DNA, Ribosomal Female Gene Expression Regulation Genes, p53 Genetic Carrier Screening Genetic Variation Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Multigene Family Pedigree Saccharomyces cerevisiae Transcription, Genetic Transfection Tumor Cells, Cultured || The Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a rare, dominantly inherited syndrome that features high risk of cancers in childhood and early adulthood. Affected families tend to develop bone and soft tissue sarcomas, breast cancers, brain tumors, leukemias, and adrenocortical carcinomas. In some kindreds, the genetic abnormality associated with this cancer phenotype is a heterozygous germline mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor gene. Recently, we identified one patient who presented in early childhood with multiple primary cancers and who harbored three germline p53 alterations (R156H and R267Q on the maternal allele and R290H on the paternal allele). To classify the biologic effects of these alterations, functional properties of each of the p53 mutants were examined using in vitro assays of cellular growth suppression and transcriptional activation. Each amino acid substitution conferred partial or complete loss of wild-type p53 function, but the child completed normal embryonic development. This observation has not been previously reported in a human, but is consistent with observations of normal embryogenesis in p53-deficient mice.",2 4 0 3
"Functional effects of PTPN11 (SHP2) mutations causing LEOPARD syndrome on epidermal growth factor-induced phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT/glycogen synthase kinase 3beta signaling. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Animals Atrial Natriuretic Factor Cells, Cultured Chick Embryo Enzyme Activation Epidermal Growth Factor Fibroblasts Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 beta Humans LEOPARD Syndrome Mutation Myocytes, Cardiac Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases Phosphorylation Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt RNA, Small Interfering Rats Recombinant Fusion Proteins Signal Transduction || LEOPARD syndrome (LS), a disorder with multiple developmental abnormalities, is mainly due to mutations that impair the activity of the tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 (PTPN11). How these alterations cause the disease remains unknown. We report here that fibroblasts isolated from LS patients displayed stronger epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced phosphorylation of both AKT and glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta) than fibroblasts from control patients. Similar results were obtained in HEK293 cells expressing LS mutants of SHP2. We found that the GAB1/phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) complex was more abundant in fibroblasts from LS than control subjects and that both AKT and GSK-3beta hyperphosphorylation were prevented by reducing GAB1 expression or by overexpressing a GAB1 mutant unable to bind to PI3K. Consistently, purified recombinant LS mutants failed to dephosphorylate GAB1 PI3K-binding sites. These mutants induced PI3K-dependent increase in cell size in a model of chicken embryo cardiac explants and in transcriptional activity of the atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) gene in neonate rat cardiomyocytes. In conclusion, SHP2 mutations causing LS facilitate EGF-induced PI3K/AKT/GSK-3beta stimulation through impaired GAB1 dephosphorylation, resulting in deregulation of a novel signaling pathway that could be involved in LS pathology.",0
The PALB2 p.Leu939Trp mutation is not associated with breast cancer risk. || BRCA1 Protein BRCA2 Protein Breast Neoplasms Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group N Protein Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Mutation Risk Tumor Suppressor Proteins || ,0
"KRAS insertion mutations are oncogenic and exhibit distinct functional properties. || Animals Child, Preschool GTPase-Activating Proteins Hepatocytes Humans Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Juvenile Mice Mutagenesis, Insertional Mutation Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras) Tandem Repeat Sequences Tumor Stem Cell Assay || Oncogenic KRAS mutations introduce discrete amino acid substitutions that reduce intrinsic Ras GTPase activity and confer resistance to GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs). Here we discover a partial duplication of the switch 2 domain of K-Ras encoding a tandem repeat of amino acids G60_A66dup in a child with an atypical myeloproliferative neoplasm. K-Ras proteins containing this tandem duplication or a similar five amino acid E62_A66dup mutation identified in lung and colon cancers transform the growth of primary myeloid progenitors and of Ba/F3 cells. Recombinant K-Ras(G60_A66dup) and K-Ras(E62_A66dup) proteins display reduced intrinsic GTP hydrolysis rates, accumulate in the GTP-bound conformation and are resistant to GAP-mediated GTP hydrolysis. Remarkably, K-Ras proteins with switch 2 insertions are impaired for PI3 kinase binding and Akt activation, and are hypersensitive to MEK inhibition. These studies illuminate a new class of oncogenic KRAS mutations and reveal unexpected plasticity in oncogenic Ras proteins that has diagnostic and therapeutic implications.",0
"A case of childhood Pompe disease demonstrating phenotypic variability of p.Asp645Asn. || Amino Acid Substitution Animals Asparagine Aspartic Acid Blotting, Western COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops DNA Mutational Analysis Echocardiography, Three-Dimensional Fibroblasts Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Muscles Mutation Phenotype Transfection alpha-Glucosidases || A six-year-old child presented at 8 months of age with proximal muscle weakness and mild cardiac hypertrophy. Some alpha-glucosidase activity was detected in muscle but not in fibroblasts. As none of the two pathogenic mutations, [c.1933G>A]+[c.2702T>A] (Asp645Asn/Leu901Gln), led to detectable alpha-glucosidase activity upon expression in COS cells, the phenotype of the patient remained unexplained. A functionally comparable set of mutations, Asp645Asn/insGnt2243, was reported previously to cause classic infantile Pompe disease [Biochem Biophys Res Commun 244 (1998) 921]. We conclude that secondary genetic or environmental factors can be decisive for the phenotypic outcome of classic infantile versus childhood Pompe disease, when the acid alpha-glucosidase activity is extremely low.",1 0
"Caffeine and halothane sensitivity of intracellular Ca2+ release is altered by 15 calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor) mutations associated with malignant hyperthermia and/or central core disease. || Animals Caffeine Calcium Cell Line DNA, Complementary Halothane Humans Malignant Hyperthermia Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Myopathies, Nemaline Rabbits Recombinant Proteins Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel || Malignant hyperthermia (MH) and central core disease (CCD) are autosomal dominant disorders of skeletal muscle in which a potentially fatal hypermetabolic crisis can be triggered by commonly used anesthetic agents. To date, 17 mutations in the human RYR1 gene encoding the Ca2+ release channel of skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum (the ryanodine receptor) have been associated with MH and/or CCD. Although many of these mutations have been linked to MH and/or CCD, with high lod (log of the odds favoring linkage versus nonlinkage) scores, others have been found in single, small families. Independent biochemical evidence for a causal role for these mutations in MH is available for only two mutants. Mutations corresponding to the human MH mutations were made in a full-length rabbit RYR1 cDNA, and wild type and mutant cDNAs were transfected into HEK-293 cells. After about 48 h, intact cells were loaded with the fluorescent Ca2+ indicator, fura-2, and intracellular Ca2+ release, induced by caffeine or halothane, was measured by photometry. Ca2+ release in cells expressing MH or CCD mutant ryanodine receptors was invariably significantly more sensitive to low concentrations of caffeine and halothane than Ca2+ release in cells expressing wild type receptors or receptors mutated in other regions of the molecule. Linear regression analysis showed that there is a strong correlation (r = 0.95, p < 0.001) between caffeine sensitivity of different RYR1 mutants measured by the cellular Ca2+ photometry assay and by the clinical in vitro caffeine halothane contracture test (IVCT). The correlation was weaker, however, for halothane (r = 0.49, p > 0.05). Abnormal sensitivity in the Ca2+ photometry assay provides supporting evidence for a causal role in MH for each of 15 single amino acid mutations in the ryanodine receptor. The study demonstrates the usefulness of the cellular Ca2+ photometry assay in the assessment of the sensitivity to caffeine and halothane of specific ryanodine receptor mutants.",0
"Reduced phosphatase activity of SHP-2 in LEOPARD syndrome: consequences for PI3K binding on Gab1. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Animals Catalysis Cercopithecus aethiops Epidermal Growth Factor Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins LEOPARD Syndrome Models, Molecular Mutation Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases Protein Binding Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Vero Cells || LEOPARD (LS) and Noonan (NS) are overlapping syndromes associated with distinct mutations of SHP-2. Whereas NS mutations enhance SHP-2 catalytic activity, we show that the activity of three representative LS mutants is undetectable when assayed using a standard protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) substrate. A different assay using a specific SHP-2 substrate confirms their decreased PTP activity, but also reveals a significant activity of the T468M mutant. In transfected cells stimulated with epidermal growth factor, the least active LS mutants promote Gab1/PI3K binding, validating our in vitro data. LS mutants thus display a reduced PTP activity both in vitro and in transfected cells.",0
"In vitro residual activity of phenylalanine hydroxylase variants and correlation with metabolic phenotypes in PKU. || Amino Acid Substitution Animals Biopterin COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops Humans Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Hyperphenylalaninemias (HPAs) are genetic diseases predominantly caused by a wide range of variants in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. In vitro expression analysis of PAH variants offers the opportunity to elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved in HPAs and to clarify whether a disease-associated variant is genuinely pathogenic, while investigating the severity of a metabolic phenotype, and determining how a variant exerts its deleterious effects on the PAH enzyme. To study the effects of gene variants on PAH activity, we investigated eight variants: c.611A>G (p.Y204C), c.635T>C (p.L212P), c.746T>C (p.L249P), c.745C>T (p.L249F), c.809G>A (p.R270K), c.782G>C (p.R261P), c.587C>A (p.S196Y) and c.1139C>T (p.T380M), associated with different phenotypic groups. Transient expression of mutant full-length cDNAs in COS-7 cells yielded PAH proteins with PAH activity levels between 7% and 51% compared to the wild-type enzyme. With one exception (p.Y204C, which had no significant impact on PAH function), lower PAH activity was associated with a more severe phenotype (e.g. p.L249P with 7% PAH activity, 100% of classic PKU and no BH4 responsiveness), while higher activity correlated with milder phenotypes (e.g. p.T380M with 28% PAH activity, 97% of mild HPA and 83% of BH4 responsiveness). The results of the in vitro residual PAH activity have major implications, both for our understanding of genotype-phenotype correlations, and thereby existing inconsistencies, but also for the elucidation of the molecular basis of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) responsiveness.",0
"Perturbation of PALB2 function by the T413S mutation found in small cell lung cancer. ||  || Background: Germline mutations in thePALB2 gene are associated with the genetic disorder Fanconi anaemia and increased predisposition to cancer. Disease-associated variants are mainly protein-truncating mutations, whereas a few missense substitutions are reported to perturb its interaction with breast cancer susceptibility proteins BRCA1 and BRCA2, which play essential roles in homology-directed repair (HDR). More recently, PALB2 was shown to associate with active genes independently of BRCA1, and through this mechanism, safeguards these regions from DNA replicative stresses. However, it is unknown whether PALB2 tumour suppressor function requires its chromatin association.Methods: Mining the public database of cancer mutations, we identified four potentially deleterious cancer-associated missense mutations within the PALB2 chromatin association motif (ChAM). To assess the impact of these mutations on PALB2 function, we generated cell lines expressing PALB2 variants harbouring corresponding ChAM mutations, and evaluated PALB2 chromatin association properties and the cellular resistance to camptothecin (CPT). Additionally, we examined the accumulation of γH2A.X and the RAD51 recombinase as readouts of DNA damage signalling and HDR, respectively.Results: We demonstrate that a small-cell lung cancer (SCLC)-associated T413S mutation in PALB2 impairs its chromatin association and confers reduced resistance to CPT, the only FDA-approved drug for relapsed SCLC. Unexpectedly, we found a less efficient γH2A.X nuclear foci formation in PALB2 T413S expressing cells, whereas a near-normal level of RAD51 nuclear foci was visible.Conclusions: These findings support the importance of PALB2 chromatin association in the suppression of tumours, including SCLC, an unusually aggressive type of cancer with poor prognosis. PALB2 T413S has little impact on RAD51 recruitment, likely due to its intact interaction with BRCA1 and BRCA2. However, this mutant shows inefficient DNA stress signalling. This finding sheds new light on the function of PALB2, playing a role in efficient DNA stress signalling through constitutive chromatin association.",0
"P-TEN, the tumor suppressor from human chromosome 10q23, is a dual-specificity phosphatase. || Amino Acid Sequence Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10 Enzyme Activation Genes, Tumor Suppressor Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoprotein Phosphatases Phosphorylation Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Substrate Specificity || Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) have long been thought to play a role in tumor suppression due to their ability to antagonize the growth promoting protein tyrosine kinases. Recently, a candidate tumor suppressor from 10q23, termed P-TEN, was isolated, and sequence homology was demonstrated with members of the PTP family, as well as the cytoskeletal protein tensin. Here we show that recombinant P-TEN dephosphorylated protein and peptide substrates phosphorylated on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues, indicating that P-TEN is a dual-specificity phosphatase. In addition, P-TEN exhibited a high degree of substrate specificity, showing selectivity for extremely acidic substrates in vitro. Furthermore, we demonstrate that mutations in P-TEN, identified from primary tumors, tumor cells lines, and a patient with Bannayan-Zonana syndrome, resulted in the ablation of phosphatase activity, demonstrating that enzymatic activity of P-TEN is necessary for its ability to function as a tumor suppressor.",0
"A silent mutation induces exon skipping in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in phenylketonuria. || Base Sequence Exons Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias RNA, Messenger Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Transfection Tumor Cells, Cultured || An A-->T substitution in cDNA nucleotide 1197 (c.1197A/T) of the human phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene has been regarded as a silent mutation, because both the wild-type (GUA) and the mutant (GUU) alleles encode a valine residue at codon 399 (V399 V). The nucleotide c.1197 is located at the 3'-end of exon 11at position -3 of the exon-intron junction. To explore whether the substitution exerts any effects on the processing of the PAH mRNA, illegitimate PAH transcripts from lymphoblast cultures of a phenylketonuria (PKU) patient heterozygous for c.1197A/T were analyzed by the polymerase chain reaction following reverse-transcription (RT-PCR). mRNAs with an exon 11 deletion were revealed. Furthermore, by using an R408 W mutation in the paternal allele as a marker, sequence analysis of the RT-PCR products indicates that virtually all PAH transcripts from the maternal allele with the c. 1197A/T substitution do not contain exon 11. To address whether this substitution is the main determinant for exon skipping, PAH minigenes with or without the substitution were constructed and transfected to a human hepatoma cell line. Analysis of the transcription products by S1 nuclease mapping clearly indicated that such exon 11 skipping was directly associated with the c.1197A/T substitution. Thus, this study demonstrates that the c.1197A/T substitution in the PAH gene is not just a neutral polymorphism but a mutation that induces post-transcriptional skipping of exon 11 leading to a PKU phenotype.",3 1 0
"Solution structure of the sixth LDL-A module of the LDL receptor. || Amino Acid Sequence Aspartic Acid Calcium Crystallography, X-Ray Glutamic Acid Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Lysine Molecular Sequence Data Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, Biomolecular Protein Binding Protein Conformation Protein Folding Receptors, LDL Solutions || The low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) is the primary mechanism for uptake of plasma cholesterol into cells and serves as a prototype for an entire class of cell surface receptors. The amino-terminal domain of the receptor consists of seven LDL-A modules; the third through the seventh modules all contribute to the binding of low-density lipoproteins (LDLs). Here, we present the NMR solution structure of the sixth LDL-A module (LR6) from the ligand binding domain of the LDLR. This module, which has little recognizable secondary structure, retains the essential structural features observed in the crystal structure of LDL-A module five (LR5) of the LDLR. Three disulfide bonds, a pair of buried residues forming a hydrophobic ""mini-core"", and a calcium-binding site that serves to organize the C-terminal lobe of the module all occupy positions in LR6 similar to those observed in LR5. The striking presence of a conserved patch of negative surface electrostatic potential among LDL-A modules of known structure suggests that ligand recognition by these repeats is likely to be mediated in part by electrostatic complementarity of receptor and ligand. Two variants of LR6, identified originally as familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) mutations, have been investigated for their ability to form native disulfide bonds under conditions that permit disulfide exchange. The first, E219K, lies near the amino-terminal end of LR6, whereas the second, D245E, alters one of the aspartate side chains that directly coordinate the bound calcium ion. After equilibration at physiologic calcium concentrations, neither E219K nor D245E folds to a unique disulfide isomer, indicating that FH mutations both within and distant from the calcium-binding site give rise to protein-folding defects.",0
"Cleft lip/palate and CDH1/E-cadherin mutations in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. || Adult Cadherins Cleft Lip Cleft Palate DNA Mutational Analysis Gene Expression Profiling Humans Mutation Pedigree Stomach Neoplasms || We report the association of CDH1/E-cadherin mutations with cleft lip, with or without cleft palate (CLP), in two families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). In each family, the CDH1 mutation was a splicing mutation generating aberrant transcripts with an in-frame deletion, removing the extracellular cadherin repeat domains involved in cell-cell adhesion. Such transcripts might encode mutant proteins with trans-dominant negative effects. We found that CDH1 is highly expressed at 4 and 5 weeks in the frontonasal prominence, and at 6 weeks in the lateral and medial nasal prominences of human embryos, and is therefore expressed during the critical stages of lip and palate development. These findings suggest that alteration of the E-cadherin pathway can contribute to human clefting.",3 4 0
"Synthesis of the Rheb and K-Ras4B GTPases. || Amino Acid Sequence Animals Circular Dichroism Microscopy, Electron, Scanning Neuropeptides PC12 Cells Protein Prenylation Rats Recombinant Proteins Solid-Phase Synthesis Techniques ras Proteins || ",0
"Reactive oxygen species generated by PAH o-quinones cause change-in-function mutations in p53. || Alcohol Oxidoreductases Aldehyde Reductase Aldo-Keto Reductases Antioxidants Copper Dose-Response Relationship, Drug Electrophoresis, Agar Gel Genes, Reporter Genes, p53 Humans Lung Neoplasms Mutagenesis Mutagens NADP Oxidation-Reduction Point Mutation Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons Quinones Reactive Oxygen Species Saccharomyces cerevisiae || Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in tobacco smoke may cause human lung cancer via metabolic activation to ultimate carcinogens. p53 is one of the most commonly mutated tumor suppressor genes in this disease. An analysis of the p53 mutational database shows that G to T transversions are a signature mutation of lung cancer. Aldo-keto reductases (AKRs) activate PAH trans-dihydrodiol proximate carcinogens to yield their corresponding reactive and redox-active o-quinones, e.g., benzo[a]pyrene-7,8-dione (BP-7,8-dione). We employed a yeast reporter system to determine whether PAH o-quinones or the ROS they generate cause change-in-function mutations in p53. N-Methyl-N-nitroso-N'-nitro-guanidine, a standard alkylating mutagen was used as a positive control. MNNG caused a dose-dependent increase in mutant yeast colonies and at the highest concentrations 8-14% of the yeast colonies were mutated and were characterized by G:C to A:T transitions in the p53 DNA binding domain. Treatment of p53 cDNA with micromolar concentrations of (+/-)-anti-7,8-dihydroxy-9alpha,10alpha-epoxy-7,8,9,10-tetrahydro-benzo[a]pyrene, (anti-BPDE, an ultimate carcinogen) or sub-micromolar concentrations of BP-7,8-dione in the presence of redox-cycling conditions (NADPH and CuCl(2)) also caused p53 mutations in a dose-dependent manner. We found that no mutants were observed with PAH o-quinones or NADPH alone. p53 mutagenesis by BP-7,8-dione was attenuated by ROS scavengers and completely abrogated by a combination of superoxide dismutase and catalase, indicating that both superoxide anion and hydroxyl radicals were the responsible mutagens. The bulk of the mutations detected were single-point mutations and were not random in occurrence. Over 46% of BP-7,8-dione-induced mutations were G:C to T:A transversions, consistent with the formation of 8-oxo-dGuo or its secondary oxidation products. In addition, 25% of these mutations were at hotspots in p53 which are known to be mutated in lung cancer. Together these data suggest that PAH o-quinones generate an endogenous mutagen (ROS) which leads to p53 inactivation. These observations provide an alternative route to G to T transversions that dominate in p53 in lung cancer.",0
"High incidence of later-onset fabry disease revealed by newborn screening. || Adult Age of Onset Fabry Disease Female Humans Incidence Infant, Newborn Male Mutation, Missense Neonatal Screening Pedigree Phenotype RNA Splicing || The classic phenotype of Fabry disease, X-linked alpha -galactosidase A (alpha -Gal A) deficiency, has an estimated incidence of approximately 1 in 50,000 males. The recent recognition of later-onset variants suggested that this treatable lysosomal disease is more frequent. To determine the disease incidence, we undertook newborn screening by assaying the alpha-Gal A activity in blood spots from 37,104 consecutive Italian male neonates. Enzyme-deficient infants were retested, and ""doubly screened-positive"" infants and their relatives were diagnostically confirmed by enzyme and mutation analyses. Twelve (0.03%) neonates had deficient alpha-Gal A activities and specific mutations, including four novel missense mutations (M51I, E66G, A73V, and R118C), three missense mutations (F113L, A143T, and N215S) identified previously in later-onset patients, and one splicing defect (IVS5(+1G-->T)) reported in a patient with the classic phenotype. Molecular modeling and in vitro overexpression of the missense mutations demonstrated structures and residual activities, which were rescued/enhanced by an alpha-Gal A-specific pharmacologic chaperone, consistent with mutations that cause the later-onset phenotype. Family studies revealed undiagnosed Fabry disease in affected individuals. In this population, the incidence of alpha-Gal A deficiency was 1 in approximately 3,100, with an 11 : 1 ratio of patients with the later-onset : classic phenotypes. If only known disease-causing mutations were included, the incidence would be 1 in approximately 4,600, with a 7 : 1 ratio of patients with the later-onset : classic phenotypes. These results suggest that the later-onset phenotype of Fabry disease is underdiagnosed among males with cardiac, cerebrovascular, and/or renal disease. Recognition of these patients would permit family screening and earlier therapeutic intervention. However, the higher incidence of the later-onset phenotype in patients raises ethical issues related to when screening should be performed--in the neonatal period or at early maturity, perhaps in conjunction with screening for other treatable adult-onset disorders.",2 0 3
"Identification and molecular characterization of a novel 3&#x2032; mutation in RUNX1 in a family with familial platelet disorder. || Acute Disease Base Sequence Blood Platelet Disorders Codon, Nonsense Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Family Health Female Germ-Line Mutation Humans Leukemia, Myeloid Male Mutation Pedigree || ",4 0
"The mutation spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene and associated haplotypes reveal ethnic heterogeneity in the Taiwanese population. || Ethnic Groups Gene Frequency Genetic Association Studies Genetic Heterogeneity Haplotypes Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Taiwan || Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency is responsible for most cases of phenylketonuria (PKU). In this study of the PAH mutation spectrum in the Taiwanese population, 139 alleles were identified including 34 different mutations. The V190G, Q267R and F392I mutations are first reported in this study. The most common mutations, R241C, R408Q and Ex6-96A>G, account for 23.2%, 12.0% and 9.2%, of the mutant alleles, respectively. Haplotype analysis shows that R241C and Ex6-96A>G are exclusively associated with haplotype 4.3 to suggest founder effects. On the other hand, R408Q is found on two distinct haplotypes suggesting recurrent mutations. The spectrum of PAH mutations in Taiwan shows various links to those of other Asian regions, yet remarkable differences exist. Notably, R408Q, E286K and -4173_-407del, accounting for 21% of all mutant alleles in Taiwan, are very rare or are undetected among PKU cohorts of other Asian regions to suggest local founder effects. Moreover, the low homozygosity value of 0.092 hints at a high degree of ethnic heterogeneity within the Taiwanese population. Our study of PAH mutation spectrum and the associated haplotypes is useful for subsequent study on the origin and migration pattern via Taiwan, an island at the historical crossroad of migration of ancient populations.",3 1 0
"Predicted effects of missense mutations on native-state stability account for phenotypic outcome in phenylketonuria, a paradigm of misfolding diseases. || Animals Biopterin Enzyme Stability Humans Mutant Proteins Mutation, Missense Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Protein Folding Protein Structure, Quaternary Protein Structure, Secondary Protein Subunits Rats Reproducibility of Results Software Thermodynamics || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a genetic disease caused by mutations in human phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). Most missense mutations result in misfolding of PAH, increased protein turnover, and a loss of enzymatic function. We studied the prediction of the energetic impact on PAH native-state stability of 318 PKU-associated missense mutations, using the protein-design algorithm FoldX. For the 80 mutations for which expression analyses have been performed in eukaryote systems, in most cases we found substantial overall correlations between the mutational energetic impact and both in vitro residual activities and patient metabolic phenotype. This finding confirmed that the decrease in protein stability is the main molecular pathogenic mechanism in PKU and the determinant for phenotypic outcome. Metabolic phenotypes have been shown to be better predicted than in vitro residual activities, probably because of greater stringency in the phenotyping process. Finally, all the remaining 238 PKU missense mutations compiled at the PAH locus knowledgebase (PAHdb) were analyzed, and their phenotypic outcomes were predicted on the basis of the energetic impact provided by FoldX. Residues in exons 7-9 and in interdomain regions within the subunit appear to play an important structural role and constitute hotspots for destabilization. FoldX analysis will be useful for predicting the phenotype associated with rare or new mutations detected in patients with PKU. However, additional factors must be considered that may contribute to the patient phenotype, such as possible effects on catalysis and interindividual differences in physiological and metabolic processes.",3 0
"Characterization of cryptic splicing in germline PTEN intronic variants in Cowden syndrome. || Adolescent Adult Aged Alternative Splicing Child Child, Preschool Female Gene Expression Regulation Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans MAP Kinase Signaling System Male Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pathology, Molecular Protein Isoforms Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt RNA Splice Sites Young Adult || Germline mutations in the tumor-suppressor gene PTEN predispose to subsets of Cowden syndrome (CS), Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, and autism. Evidence-based classification of PTEN variants as either deleterious or benign is urgently needed for accurate molecular diagnosis and gene-informed genetic counseling. We studied 34 different germline PTEN intronic variants from 61 CS patients, characterized their PTEN mRNA processing, and analyzed PTEN expression and downstream readouts of P-AKT and P-ERK1/2. While we found that many mutations near splice junctions result in exon skipping, we also identified the presence of cryptic splicing that resulted in premature termination or a shift in isoform usage. PTEN protein expression is significantly lower in the group with splicing changes while P-AKT, but not P-ERK1/2, is significantly increased. Our observations of these PTEN intronic variants should contribute to the determination of pathogenicity of PTEN intronic variants and aid in genetic counseling.",2 4 0 3
"Novel mechanism of a CDH1 splicing mutation in a Korean patient with signet ring cell carcinoma. ||  || We report a novel mechanism of a CDH1 splicing mutation in a patient with signet ring cell carcinoma of the stomach. A 27-year-old man complaining of aggravated dyspepsia was diagnosed with signet ring cell carcinoma. Both his father and uncle had died of stomach cancer at a young age. DNA sequencing analysis of the CDH1 gene revealed a splice site mutation(c.833-2A>G). By RNA/cDNA sequencing analysis, CDH1 c.833-2A>G generated a new acceptor site within intron 6, causing the insertion of a 79-bp intronic sequence between exon 6 and 7 (r.833-79_833-1ins), and resulting in a frame shift. E-cadherin immunohistochemical staining revealed a loss of CDH1 expression. This study reveals the disease-causing mechanism of this splicing mutation, and emphasizes the need for functional studies using RNA samples for the accurate interpretation of detected splicing variant. This is the first reported case of a CDH1 mutation in a Korean patient.",4 0
"A mouse model of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Animals Base Sequence Cardiac Output Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Disease Models, Animal Female Gene Transfer Techniques Heart Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Male Mice Mice, Mutant Strains Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Myocardium Myosin Heavy Chains Physical Exertion Sex Characteristics Ventricular Function, Left || A mouse model of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) was generated by the introduction of an Arg 403 --> Gln mutation into the alpha cardiac myosin heavy chain (MHC) gene. Homozygous alpha MHC 403/403 mice died 7 days after birth, and sedentary heterozygous alpha MHC 403/+ mice survived for 1 year. Cardiac histopathology and dysfunction in the alpha MHC 403/+ mice resembled human FHC. Cardiac dysfunction preceded histopathologic changes, and myocyte disarray, hypertrophy, and fibrosis increased with age. Young male alpha MHC 403/+ mice showed more evidence of disease than did their female counterparts. Preliminary results suggested that exercise capacity may have been compromised in the alpha MHC 403/+ mice. This mouse model may help to define the natural history of FHC.",0
"Identification and characterization of melanocortin-4 receptor gene mutations in morbidly obese finnish children and adults. || Adolescent Adult Cell Line Child Cohort Studies Female Finland Heterozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Obesity, Morbid Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Signal Transduction Tissue Distribution || Two Finnish cohorts, comprising 56 children with severe early-onset obesity (relative weight for height greater than or equal to +70% before age 10) and 252 morbidly obese adults (body mass index, > or = 40 kg/m(2)), were screened for melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) mutations. We identified a pathogenic mutation (S127L) in one child, causing severe early-onset obesity. We describe the phenotype of this particular mutation for the first time. We also identified a novel (I226T) polymorphism in the coding and two new variations (-439delGC and 1059C>T) outside the coding region of the MC4R gene. Three previously described polymorphisms (V103I, T112M, and I125L) were identified. In vitro functional studies of variants T112M, S127L, and I226T supported a pathogenic role of the S127L mutation, because signaling properties of the receptor in response to the MC4R agonists alpha-MSH, beta-MSH, and gamma(1)-MSH were impaired. The S127L mutation did not affect receptor inhibition by the antagonist agouti-related protein. Localization of the three variant receptors was similar to that of wild type. In conclusion, a pathogenic MC4R mutation was found among subjects with severe early-onset obesity but not among morbidly obese adults. Impaired function of the S127L receptor was due to reduced activation, not a defect of protein transport to the cell membrane.",2 4 0
"Mutational and phenotypical spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Denmark. || Alleles Denmark Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Humans Male Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || We describe the genotypes of the complete cohort, from 1967 to 2014, of phenylketonuria (PKU) patients in Denmark, in total 376 patients. A total of 752 independent alleles were investigated. Mutations were identified on 744 PKU alleles (98.9%). In total, 82 different mutations were present in the cohort. The most frequent mutation c.1315+1G>A (IVS12+1G>A) was found on 25.80% of the 744 alleles. Other very frequent mutations were c.1222C>T (p.R408W) (16.93%) and c.1241A>G (p.Y414C) (11.15%). Among the identified mutations, five mutations; c.532G>A (p.E178K), c.730C>T (p.P244S), c.925G>A (p.A309T), c.1228T>A (p.F410I), and c.1199+4A>G (IVS11+4A>G) have not been reported previously. The metabolic phenotypes of PKU are classified into four categories; 'classical PKU', 'moderate PKU', 'mild PKU' and 'mild hyperphenylalaninemia'. In this study, we assigned the phenotypic outcome of three of the five novel mutations and furthermore six not previously classified mutations to one of the four PKU categories.",3 1 0
"A phenylalanine hydroxylase amino acid polymorphism with implications for molecular diagnostics. || African Continental Ancestry Group Alleles Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Dose-Response Relationship, Drug Escherichia coli Exons Family Health Humans Kinetics Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Recombinant Proteins || Mutations in the gene encoding phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH, EC 1.14.16.1) are associated with various degrees of hyperphenylalaninemia, including classical phenylketonuria (PKU). We examined the PAH gene in a Brazilian PKU family of African origin and identified three missense variants, R252W (c.754C --> T), K274E (c.820A --> G), and I318T (c.953T --> C), the two latter of which were transmitted in cis. Expression analyses in two different in vitro systems showed that I318T is associated with profoundly decreased enzyme activity, whereas the enzyme activity of K274E is indistinguishable from that of the wild-type protein. Detailed kinetic analyses of PAH expressed in E. coli showed that the K274E mutant protein has kinetic properties similar to that of the wild-type protein. Population studies have suggested that the K274E variant occurs on approximately 4% of African-American PAH alleles, whereas the neonatal screening incidence of PKU among African Americans is only 1:100,000. This is to our knowledge the first demonstration of a PAH missense variant with no apparent association to PAH deficiency. Awareness of this common variant may be helpful to laboratories that perform molecular diagnosis of PAH deficiency in populations of African origin.",3 1 0
"Biochemical characterization of novel germline BRAF and MEK mutations in cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome. || Amino Acid Substitution Blotting, Western Craniofacial Abnormalities Heart Defects, Congenital Humans MAP Kinase Kinase 1 MAP Kinase Kinase 2 Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf Skin Abnormalities Syndrome raf Kinases || Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC) is a sporadic, complex developmental disorder involving characteristic craniofacial features, cardiac defects, ectodermal abnormalities, growth deficiency, hypotonia, and developmental delay. CFC is caused by alteration of activity through the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway due to heterogeneous de novo germline mutations in B-Raf mutant proteins, MEK1 and MEK2. Approximately 75% of individuals with CFC have mutations in BRAF. In vitro functional studies demonstrate that many of these mutations confer increase activity upon the mutant protein as compared to the wildtype protein. However, as is seen cancer, some of the B-Raf mutant proteins are kinase impaired. Western blot analyses corroborate kinase assays as determined by mutant proteins phosphorylating downstream effectors MEK and ERK. Approximately 25% of individuals with CFC have mutations in either MEK1 or MEK2 that lead to increased MEK kinase activity as judged by increased phosphorylation of its downstream effector ERK. Unlike BRAF, no somatic mutations have ever been identified in MEK genes. The identification of novel germline BRAF and MEK mutations in CFC will help understand the pathophysiology of this syndrome. Furthermore, it will also provide insight to the normal function of B-Raf and MEK, and contribute to the knowledge of the role of the MAPK pathway in cancer. Since the MAPK pathway has been studied intensively in the context of cancer, numerous therapeutics that specifically target this pathway may merit investigation in this population of patients.",0
"Defective mutations in the insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF-1) gene in late-onset type 2 diabetes mellitus. || Blood Glucose Blotting, Western Chloramphenicol O-Acetyltransferase DNA Mutational Analysis Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female France Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Homeodomain Proteins Humans Insulin Male Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Time Factors Trans-Activators || Type 2 diabetes mellitus is a common disabling disease with onset in middle-aged individuals, caused by an imbalance between insulin production and action. Genetic studies point to major genetic components, but, with the exception of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), specific diabetes susceptibility genes remain to be identified. Recent studies showed that a dominant negative mutation in the insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF-1), a pancreatic beta-cell specific transcription factor, causes pancreatic agenesis and MODY. Thus, we investigated 192 French, non-MODY type 2 diabetic families for mutations in IPF-1. We identified 3 novel IPF-1 mutations, including 2 substitutions (Q59L and D76N) and an in-frame proline insertion (InsCCG243). Functional transactivation assays of these IPF-1 mutant isoforms in a beta-pancreatic tumor cell line transfected with a transcriptional reporter and IPF-1 expression plasmids demonstrate a significant inhibition of basal insulin promoter activity (stronger with the InsCCG243 mutant). We find that the InsCCG243 mutation is linked, in 2 families, to an autosomal dominant-like late-onset form of type 2 diabetes, in which insulin secretion becomes progressively impaired. The lower penetrance D76N and Q59L mutations were more prevalent and were associated with a relative risk of 12.6 for diabetes and with decreased glucose-stimulated insulin-secretion in nondiabetic subjects. We propose that IPF-1 mutations can cause MODY or apparently monogenic late-onset diabetes and that they represent a significant risk factor for type 2 diabetes in humans.",2 0
"RUNX1 meets MLL: epigenetic regulation of hematopoiesis by two leukemia genes. || Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit Epigenesis, Genetic Gene Expression Regulation, Leukemic Hematopoiesis Humans Leukemia Myeloid-Lymphoid Leukemia Protein Point Mutation Protein Binding || A broad range of human leukemias carries RUNX1 and MLL genetic alterations. Despite such widespread involvements, the relationship between RUNX1 and MLL has never been appreciated. Recently, we showed that RUNX1 physically and functionally interacts with MLL, thereby regulating the epigenetic status of critical cis-regulatory elements for hematopoietic genes. This newly unveiled interaction between the two most prevalent leukemia genes has solved a long-standing conundrum: leukemia-associated RUNX1 N-terminal point mutants that exhibit no obvious functional abnormalities in classical assays for the assessment of transcriptional activities. These mutants turned out to be defective in MLL interaction and subsequent epigenetic modifications that can be examined by the histone-modification status of cis-regulatory elements in the target genes. RUNX1/MLL binding confirms the importance of RUNX1 function as an epigenetic regulator. Recent studies employing next-generation sequencing on human hematological malignancies identified a plethora of mutations in epigenetic regulator genes. These new findings would enhance our understanding on the mechanistic basis for leukemia development and may provide a novel direction for therapeutic applications. This review summarizes the current knowledge about the epigenetic regulation of normal and malignant hematopoiesis by RUNX1 and MLL.",0
"The distribution and characteristics of LDL receptor mutations in China: A systematic review. || China Computer Simulation Databases, Genetic Hong Kong Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Lipids Mutation Mutation Rate Phenotype Receptors, LDL Taiwan || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a common and serious dominant genetic disease, and its main pathogenic gene is the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene. This study aimed to perform a systematic review of LDLR mutations in China. Using PubMed, Embase, Wanfang (Chinese), the Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure (Chinese), and the Chinese Biological and Medical database (Chinese), public data were limited to December 2014. The Medical Subject Headings terms and the following key words were used: ""familial hypercholesterolemia"", ""Chinese"", ""China"", ""Hong Kong"", and ""Taiwan"". A total of 74 studies including 295 probands with 131 LDLR mutations were identified. Most of the mutations were located in exon 4 of LDLR and approximately 60% of the mutations were missense mutations. Thirty new mutations that were not recorded in the LDLR databases were found. In silico analysis revealed that most of the mutations were pathogenic. The primary LDLR mutations were C308Y, H562Y, and A606T, and all of the mutations had functional significance. Prevalence data suggest that there are nearly 3.8 million FH patients in China, although reported numbers are much smaller, suggesting that FH is widely misunderstood. This systematic review provides information that is specific to China for inclusion in the international FH database.",0
"PTEN autoregulates its expression by stabilization of p53 in a phosphatase-independent manner. || Gene Expression Regulation Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans PTEN Phosphohydrolase Promoter Regions, Genetic Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue, deleted on chromosome 10) is a tumor suppressor with dual phosphatase activity and mutations of its gene, PTEN, have been associated with many sporadic cancers and heritable neoplasia syndromes, including Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome. However, accumulating evidence now shows that PTEN may have novel functions other than as a phosphatase. In the present study, we show that PTEN is able to autoregulate its expression through the stabilization of another tumor suppressor p53. We further show that PTEN enhances p53 transactivation, a relationship that requires the interaction between PTEN and p53 and is PTEN phosphatase independent. We show that cell lines from Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome patients with germ line PTEN promoter mutations in the vicinity of the p53-binding motifs have altered p53 regulation. This seems to be due to reduced PTEN stability and decreased PTEN-p53 interactions. Our data provide clues to better understand the regulation of PTEN expression and the possible mechanisms of the pathogenesis of the subset of Cowden syndrome individuals with germ line promoter variation and who lack mutations in the PTEN coding region and splice sites. Importantly, this mechanism also holds for those sporadic tumors that lack intragenic mutations but have hemizygous deletion of PTEN, which includes the promoter region as manifested by loss-of-heterozygosity of 10q markers. The importance of our observations is underlined by the broad spectrum of neoplasias that harbor somatic PTEN or p53 alterations, or both.",3 0
"Molecular and clinical analysis of RAF1 in Noonan syndrome and related disorders: dephosphorylation of serine 259 as the essential mechanism for mutant activation. ||  || Noonan syndrome (NS) and related disorders are autosomal dominant disorders characterized by heart defects, facial dysmorphism, ectodermal abnormalities, and mental retardation. The dysregulation of the RAS/MAPK pathway appears to be a common molecular pathogenesis of these disorders: mutations in PTPN11, KRAS, and SOS1 have been identified in patients with NS, those in KRAS, BRAF, MAP2K1, and MAP2K2 in patients with CFC syndrome, and those in HRAS mutations in Costello syndrome patients. Recently, mutations in RAF1 have been also identified in patients with NS and two patients with LEOPARD (multiple lentigines, electrocardiographic conduction abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary stenosis, abnormal genitalia, retardation of growth, and sensorineural deafness) syndrome. In the current study, we identified eight RAF1 mutations in 18 of 119 patients with NS and related conditions without mutations in known genes. We summarized clinical manifestations in patients with RAF1 mutations as well as those in NS patients withPTPN11, SOS1, or KRAS mutations previously reported. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and short stature were found to be more frequently observed in patients with RAF1 mutations. Mutations in RAF1 were clustered in the conserved region 2 (CR2) domain, which carries an inhibitory phosphorylation site (serine at position 259; S259). Functional studies revealed that the RAF1 mutants located in the CR2 domain resulted in the decreased phosphorylation of S259, and that mutant RAF1 then dissociated from 14-3-3, leading to a partial ERK activation. Our results suggest that the dephosphorylation of S259 is the primary pathogenic mechanism in the activation of RAF1 mutants located in the CR2 domain as well as of downstream ERK.",0
"BACH1 is critical for homologous recombination and appears to be the Fanconi anemia gene product FANCJ. || Basic-Leucine Zipper Transcription Factors Breast Neoplasms Cell Division Cell Line, Tumor Chromosome Mapping DNA Primers Fanconi Anemia Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group Proteins Female G2 Phase Genes, Reporter Green Fluorescent Proteins Humans Leucine Zippers Recombination, Genetic Transcription Factors Transfection || We showed in this study that cells deficient of the BRCA1-associated BACH1 helicase, also known as BRIP1, failed to elicit homologous recombination (HR) after DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs). BACH1-deficient cells were also sensitive to mitomycin C (MMC) and underwent MMC-induced chromosome instability. Moreover, we identified a homozygous nonsense mutation in BACH1 in a FA-J patient-derived cell line and could not detect BACH1 protein in this cell line. Expression of wild-type BACH1 in this cell line reduced the accumulation of cells at G2/M phases following exposure to DNA crosslinkers, a characteristic of Fanconi anemia (FA) cells. These results support the conclusion that BACH1 is FANCJ.",0
"Germline mutations in components of the Ras signaling pathway in Noonan syndrome and related disorders. || Animals Genes, ras Germ-Line Mutation Humans Models, Biological Noonan Syndrome Signal Transduction || Ras proteins control a variety of critical cellular processes, and somatic mutations in RAS genes (and other members of signaling networks regulated by Ras) are common in human malignancies. Ras proteins are guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins that cycle between active GTP-bound and inactive guanosine diphosphate (GDP) bound conformations. Cancer-associated Ras mutations typically alter amino acids G12, G13 or Q61. These mutant Ras proteins display impaired GTPase activity and are resistant to GTPase activating proteins (GAPs). We and others recently discovered novel germline KRAS mutations in individuals diagnosed with Noonan or cardio-facio-cutanous (CFC) syndrome, two clinically overlapping disorders characterized by short stature, distinct facial anomalies, heart defects, and other developmental abnormalities. We found that the mutant K-Ras proteins encoded by NS-associated alleles have less pronounced biochemical defects than known Ras oncoproteins, which likely explains why these mutations are tolerated in the germline. Together with the recent findings of mutations in other members of the Ras signaling cascade in CFC syndrome and in Costello syndrome, another clinically related disorder, it is now clear that Noonan-like features are common phenotypic consequences of systemic deregulation of the Ras pathway. The discovery of germline mutations in this group of related genetic disorders underscores the pivotal role of the degree and duration of Ras activation in cell fate decisions during embryonic development and morphogenesis.",4 0
"A Saturation Mutagenesis Approach to Understanding PTEN Lipid Phosphatase Activity and Genotype-Phenotype Relationships. || Alleles Cluster Analysis Genetic Association Studies High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Mutagenesis Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase || Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) is a tumor suppressor frequently mutated in diverse cancers. Germline PTEN mutations are also associated with a range of clinical outcomes, including PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). To empower new insights into PTEN function and clinically relevant genotype-phenotype relationships, we systematically evaluated the effect of PTEN mutations on lipid phosphatase activity in vivo. Using a massively parallel approach that leverages an artificial humanized yeast model, we derived high-confidence estimates of functional impact for 7,244 single amino acid PTEN variants (86% of possible). We identified 2,273 mutations with reduced cellular lipid phosphatase activity, which includes 1,789 missense mutations. These data recapitulated known functional findings but also uncovered new insights into PTEN protein structure, biochemistry, and mutation tolerance. Several residues in the catalytic pocket showed surprising mutational tolerance. We identified that the solvent exposure of wild-type residues is a critical determinant of mutational tolerance. Further, we created a comprehensive functional map by leveraging correlations between amino acid substitutions to impute functional scores for all variants, including those not present in the assay. Variant functional scores can reliably discriminate likely pathogenic from benign alleles. Further, 32% of ClinVar unclassified missense variants are phosphatase deficient in our assay, supporting their reclassification. ASD-associated mutations generally had less severe fitness scores relative to PHTS-associated mutations (p = 7.16 × 10-5) and a higher fraction of hypomorphic mutations, arguing for continued genotype-phenotype studies in larger clinical datasets that can further leverage these rich functional data.",0
"Negative regulation of Stat3 by activating PTPN11 mutants contributes to the pathogenesis of Noonan syndrome and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia. || Animals Flow Cytometry Gene Expression Regulation, Leukemic Humans Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Juvenile Mice Models, Biological Mutation Noonan Syndrome Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 STAT3 Transcription Factor Tyrosine || Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant congenital disorder characterized by multiple birth defects including heart defects and myeloproliferative disease (MPD). Approximately 50% of NS patients have germline gain-of-function mutations in PTPN11, which encodes the protein-tyrosine phosphatase, Shp2. We provide evidence that conditional ablation of Stat3 in hematopoietic cells and cardiac valvular tissues leads to myeloid progenitor hyperplasia and pulmonary stenosis due to the leaflet thickening, respectively. Consistently, STAT3 activation is significantly compromised in peripheral blood cells from NS patients bearing Shp2-activating mutations. Biochemical and functional analyses demonstrate that activated Shp2 is able to down-regulate Tyr(P)-Stat3 and that constitutively active Stat3 rescues activating mutant Shp2-induced granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor hypersensitivity in bone marrow cells. Collectively, our work demonstrates that Stat3 is an essential signaling component potentially contributing to the pathogenesis of NS and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia caused by PTPN11 gain-of-function mutations.",0
"Founder effect of a prevalent phenylketonuria mutation in the Oriental population. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Base Sequence China Female Genotype Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Oligonucleotide Probes Pedigree Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || A missense mutation has been identified in the human phenylalanine hydroxylase [PAH; phenylalanine 4-monooxygenase; L-phenylalanine, tetrahydrobiopterin:oxygen oxidoreductase (4-hydroxylating), EC 1.14.16.1] gene in a Chinese patient with classic phenylketonuria (PKU). A G-to-C transition at the second base of codon 413 in exon 12 of the gene results in the substitution of Pro413 for Arg413 in the mutant protein. This mutation (R413P) results in negligible enzymatic activity when expressed in heterologous mammalian cells and is compatible with a classic PKU phenotype in the patient. Population genetic studies reveal that this mutation is tightly linked to restriction fragment length polymorphism haplotype 4, which is the predominant haplotype of the PAH locus in the Oriental population. It accounts for 13.8% of northern Chinese and 27% of Japanese PKU alleles, but it is rare in southern Chinese (2.2%) and is absent in the Caucasian population. The data demonstrate unambiguously that the mutation occurred after racial divergence of Orientals and Caucasians and suggest that the allele has spread throughout the Orient by a founder effect. Previous protein polymorphism studies in eastern Asia have led to the hypothesis that ""northern Mongoloids"" represented a founding population in Asia. Our results are compatible with this hypothesis in that the PKU mutation might have occurred in northern Mongoloids and subsequently spread to the Chinese and Japanese populations.",3 0
"Molecular mechanism of the constitutive activation of the L250Q human melanocortin-4 receptor polymorphism. || Agouti-Related Protein Amino Acid Sequence Amino Acid Substitution Animals Cell Line Cell Membrane Female Gene Expression Regulation Glutamine Humans Hypothalamus Leucine Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Peptide Fragments Polymorphism, Genetic Protein Conformation Rats Rats, Sprague-Dawley Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 || The Melanocortin-4 Receptor is a G-protein coupled receptor that has been physiologically linked to participate in the regulation of energy homeostasis. The Melanocortin-4 Receptor is stimulated by endogenous melanocortin agonists derived from the pro-opiomelanocortin gene transcript and antagonized by the endogenous antagonist agouti-related protein. Central administration of melanocortin agonists has been demonstrated to decrease food intake and conversely, treatment with antagonists resulted in increased food intake. Deletion of the Melanocortin-4 Receptor gene from the mouse genome results in an obese and hyperphagic phenotype. Polymorphisms of the human Melanocortin-4-Receptor have been found in severely obese individuals, suggesting that Melanocortin-4 Receptor malfunction might be involved in human obesity and obesity-associated diabetes. Herein, we have performed experiments to understand the molecular mechanisms associated with the L250Q human Melanocortin-4-Receptor polymorphism discovered in an extremely obese woman. This L250Q human Melanocortin-4-Receptor has been pharmacologically characterized to result in a constitutively active receptor. The fact that a constitutively active human Melanocortin-4-Receptor mutation was found in an obese person is a physiologic contradiction, as chronic activation of the human Melanocortin-4-Receptor and subsequently high cyclic adenosine monophosphate levels should theoretically result in a normal or lean phenotype. In this study, we demonstrated that agouti-related protein acts as an inverse agonist at this constitutively active receptor, and we propose a mechanism by which agouti-related protein might contribute to the obese phenotype in the L250Q patient. In addition, using receptor mutagenesis, pharmacology, and computer modeling approaches, we investigated the molecular mechanism by which modification of the L250 residue results in constitutive activation of the human Melanocortin-4-Receptor.",0
"Two hot spot mutant p53 mouse models display differential gain of function in tumorigenesis. || Adult Alleles Animals Cell Line, Tumor Cell Proliferation Cell Transformation, Neoplastic Disease Models, Animal Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Lymphoma, T-Cell Mice Mice, Inbred C57BL Mice, Knockout Mutation Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt Signal Transduction Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Mutant p53 proteins not only lose their tumor-suppressor function but some acquire oncogenic gain of function (GOF). The published mutp53 knock-in (KI) alleles (R172H, R270H, R248W) manifest GOF by broader tumor spectrum and more metastasis compared with the p53-null allele, but do not shorten survival. However, whether GOF also occurs with other mutations and whether they are all biologically equal is unknown. To answer this, we created novel humanized mutp53 KI mice harboring the hot spot alleles R248Q and G245S. Intriguingly, their impact was very different. Compared with p53-null mice, R248Q/- mice had accelerated onset of all tumor types and shorter survival, thus unprecedented strong GOF. In contrast, G245S/- mice were similar to null mice in tumor latency and survival. This was associated with a twofold higher T-lymphoma proliferation in R248Q/- mice compared with G245S/- and null mice. Moreover, R248Q/- hematopoietic and mesenchymal stem cells were expanded relative to G245S/- and null mice, the first indication that GOF also acts by perturbing pretumorous progenitor pools. Importantly, these models closely mirror Li-Fraumeni patients who show higher tumor numbers, accelerated onset and shorter tumor-free survival by 10.5 years when harboring codon R248Q mutations as compared with Li-Fraumeni patients with codon G245S mutations or p53 deletions/loss. Conversely, both KI alleles caused a modest broadening of tumor spectrum with enhanced Akt signaling compared with null mice. These models are the first in vivo proof for differential oncogenic strength among p53 GOF alleles, with genotype-phenotype correlations borne out in humans.",0
"Protein stability and in vivo concentration of missense mutations in phenylalanine hydroxylase. || Cells, Cultured Computer Simulation Conserved Sequence Humans Models, Molecular Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Protein Stability Protein Structure, Tertiary Recombinant Proteins Thermodynamics || A previous computational analysis of missense mutations linked to monogenic disease found a high proportion of missense mutations affect protein stability, rather than other aspects of protein structure and function. The purpose of this study is to relate the presence of such stability damaging missense mutations to the levels of a particular protein present under ""in vivo"" like conditions, and to test the reliability of the computational methods. Experimental data on a set of missense mutations of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) associated with the monogenic disease phenylketonuria (PKU) have been compared with the expected in vivo impact on protein function, obtained using SNPs3D, an in silico analysis package. A high proportion of the PAH mutations are predicted to be destabilizing. The overall agreement between predicted stability impact and experimental evidence for lower protein levels is in accordance with the estimated error rates of the methods. For these mutations, destabilization of protein three-dimensional structure is the major molecular mechanism leading to PKU, and results in a substantial reduction of in vivo PAH protein concentration. Although of limited scale, the results support the view that destabilization is the most common mechanism by which missense mutations cause monogenic disease. In turn, this conclusion suggests the general therapeutic strategy of developing drugs targeted at restoring wild type stability.",0
"Activation of MAPK by inverse agonists in six naturally occurring constitutively active mutant human melanocortin-4 receptors. || Agouti-Related Protein Amino Acid Sequence Anticarcinogenic Agents Cyclic AMP Extracellular Signal-Regulated MAP Kinases HEK293 Cells Humans Imidazoles Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Oligopeptides Phosphorylation Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 alpha-MSH || The melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) is a G protein-coupled receptor that plays an essential role in regulating energy homeostasis. Defects in MC4R are the most common monogenic form of obesity, with about 170 distinct mutations identified in human. In addition to the conventional Gs-stimulated adenylyl cyclase pathway, it has been recently demonstrated that MC4R also activates mitogen-activated protein kinases, extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2). Herein, we investigated the potential of four MC4R ligands that are inverse agonists at the Gs-cAMP signaling pathway, including agouti-related peptide (AgRP), MCL0020, Ipsen 5i and ML00253764, to regulate ERK1/2 activation (pERK1/2) in wild type and six naturally occurring constitutively active mutant (CAM) MC4Rs. We showed that these four inverse agonists acted as agonists for the ERK1/2 signaling cascade in wild type and CAM MC4Rs. Three mutants (P230L, L250Q and F280L) had significantly increased pERK1/2 level upon stimulation with all four inverse agonists, with maximal induction ranging from 1.6 to 4.2-fold. D146N had significantly increased pERK1/2 level upon stimulation with AgRP, MCL0020 or ML00253764, but not Ipsen 5i. The pERK1/2 levels of H76R and S127L were significantly increased only upon stimulation with AgRP or MCL0020. In summary, our studies demonstrated for the first time that MC4R inverse agonists at the Gs-cAMP pathway could serve as agonists in the MAPK pathway. These results suggested that there were multiple activation states of MC4R with ligand-specific and/or mutant-specific conformations capable of differentially coupling the MC4R to distinct signaling pathways.",0
"Update of the pompe disease mutation database with 60 novel GAA sequence variants and additional studies on the functional effect of 34 previously reported variants. || Databases, Genetic Genetic Predisposition to Disease Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive lysosomal glycogen storage disorder, characterized by progressive muscle weakness. Deficiency of acid α-glucosidase (EC; 3.2.1.20/3) can be caused by numerous pathogenic variants in the GAA gene. The Pompe Disease Mutation Database at http://www.pompecenter.nl aims to list all variants and their effect. This update reports on 94 variants. We examined 35 novel and 34 known mutations by site-directed mutagenesis and transient expression in COS-7 cells or HEK293T cells. Each of these mutations was given a severity rating using a previously published system, based on the level of acid α-glucosidase activity in medium and transfected cells and on the quantity and quality of the different molecular mass species in the posttranslational modification and transport of acid α-glucosidase. This approach enabled to classify 55 missense mutations as pathogenic and 13 as likely nonpathogenic. Based on their nature and the use of in silico analysis (Alamut® software), 12 of the additional 25 novel mutations were predicted to be pathogenic including 4 splicing mutations, 6 mutations leading to frameshift, and 2 point mutations causing stop codons. Seven of the additional mutations were considered nonpathogenic (4 silent and 3 occurring in intron regions), and 6 are still under investigation.",1 4 0
"Childhood Pompe disease: clinical spectrum and genotype in 31 patients. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool Cross-Sectional Studies Diagnosis, Differential Female Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Motor Activity Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || As little information is available on children with non-classic presentations of Pompe disease, we wished to gain knowledge of specific clinical characteristics and genotypes. We included all patients younger than 18 years, who had been evaluated at the Pompe Center in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, between 1975 and 2012, excluding those with the classic-infantile form. None were treated with enzyme replacement therapy at the time of evaluation. We collected information on first symptoms, diagnosis, use of a wheelchair and/or respirator, and enzyme and mutation analysis and assessed muscle strength, pulmonary function, and cardiac parameters. Thirty-one patients participated. Median age at symptom onset was 2.6 years (range 0.5-13y) and at diagnosis 4.0 years. Most first problems were delayed motor development and problems related to limb-girdle weakness. Fatigue, persistent diarrhea and problems in raising the head in supine position were other first complaints. Ten patients were asymptomatic at time of diagnosis. Five of them developed symptoms before inclusion in this study. Over 50 % of all patients had low or absent reflexes, a myopathic face, and scoliosis; 29 % were underweight. Muscle strength of the neck flexors, hip extensors, hip flexors, and shoulder abductors were most frequently reduced. Pulmonary function was decreased in over 48 % of the patients; 2 patients had cardiac hypertrophy. Patients with mutations other than the c.-32-13T > G were overall more severely affected, while 18 out of the 21 patients (86 %) with the c.-32-13T > G/'null' genotype were male. Our study shows that Pompe disease can present with severe mobility and respiratory problems during childhood. Pompe disease should be considered in the differential diagnosis of children with less familiar signs such as disproportional weakness of the neck flexors, unexplained fatigue, persistent diarrhea and unexplained high CK/ASAT/ALAT. Disease presentation appears to be different from adult patients. The majority of affected children with GAA genotype c.-32-13T > G/'null' appeared to be male.",1 0
"PAH gene mutations in the Sicilian population: association with minihaplotypes and expression analysis. || Alleles Animals Blotting, Northern COS Cells Child DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic Genotype Haplotypes Humans Male Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic RNA, Messenger Recombinant Fusion Proteins Sicily || The molecular basis of PAH deficiency in the Sicilian population is characterized by a marked heterogeneity, with 44 mutations at a single locus identified by a ""gene-scanning"" approach and accounting for a detection rate of 91%. The remaining 9% of PAH alleles does not bear mutations in any of the 13 exons and 24 exon/intron junctions. Three mutations IVS10nt-11 G > A, R261Q, and A300S accounted for 30.5%, whereas the remaining mutations were found at relative frequencies of less than 5% and 20 mutations were observed once only. Five mutations have been detected only in Sicilians so far. By studying the association of mutations with intragenic STR-VNTR haplotypes (""minihaplotypes""), ""identity by descent"" has been established for 24 mutations also detected in other populations. This finding supports the hypothesis of a multipolar origin for a large proportion of PAH mutant alleles currently detected in Sicilians. In order to improve our understanding of the clinical heterogeneity of PAH deficiency in this population, we have for the first time analyzed three missense mutations L41F, T92I, and P211T in vitro by the pCDNA3/COS-7 eukaryotic expression system and found an activity of 10, 76, and 72%, respectively, compared to normal PAH. In two HPA patients with mild PKU and mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP), harboring respectively L41F/R261Q and T92I/P281L genotypes, the predicted biochemical effect of these genotypes appeared to be consistent with the metabolic phenotypes. In contrast, discordant metabolic phenotypes (mild PKU and MHP) were observed in two unrelated patients bearing the same R261Q/P211T genotype, a finding which underscores the complex relationship linking genotype to phenotype in PAH deficiency. Hypotheses on the possible mechanisms responsible for the observed discordance are discussed. The spectrum of PAH gene mutations in Sicily reflects the complex demographic history of this island at the crossroad of prehistoric and historical migrations in the Mediterranean sea. The data presented in this study also add to the present knowledge on the relationship between PAH genotypes and HPA phenotype and are expected to improve PAH genotyping among individuals with hyperphenylalaninemia.",3 1 0
"Predicting cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM) status in Pompe disease using GAA mutations: lessons learned from 10 years of clinical laboratory testing experience. || Antibody Formation Cells, Cultured Cross Reactions Enzyme Replacement Therapy Ethnic Groups Fibroblasts Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunomodulation Infant Infant, Newborn Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) for Pompe disease using recombinant acid alpha-glucosidase (rhGAA) has resulted in increased survival although the clinical response is variable. Cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM)-negative status has been recognized as a poor prognostic factor. CRIM-negative patients make no GAA protein and develop sustained high antibody titers to ERT that render the treatment ineffective. Antibody titers are generally low for the majority of CRIM-positive patients and there is typically a better clinical outcome. Because immunomodulation has been found to be most effective in CRIM-negative patients prior to, or shortly after, initiation of ERT, knowledge of CRIM status is important before ERT is begun. We have analyzed 243 patients with infantile Pompe disease using a Western blot method for determining CRIM status and using cultured skin fibroblasts. Sixty-one out of 243 (25.1%) patients tested from various ethnic backgrounds were found to be CRIM-negative. We then correlated the CRIM results with GAA gene mutations where available (52 CRIM-negative and 88 CRIM-positive patients). We found that, in most cases, CRIM status can be predicted from GAA mutations, potentially circumventing the need for invasive skin biopsy and time wasted in culturing cells in the future. Continued studies in this area will help to increase the power of GAA gene mutations in predicting CRIM status as well as possibly identifying CRIM-positive patients who are at risk for developing high antibody titers.",3 1 4 0
"Hereditary leukemia due to rare RUNX1c splice variant (L472X) presents with eczematous phenotype. ||  || Deleterious mutations in the RUNX1 gene cause hereditary leukemia due to a rare syndrome called Familial platelet Disorder with Associated Myeloid Malignancy (FPDMM). We describe the characteristics of a family with FPDMM due to a novel RUNX1 mutation (L472X), located in the most 3-prime end of the gene reported to date. Our 36-year old proband presented with incidentally detected thrombocytopenia and a family history suggestive of FPDMM. Contrary to previously described families, affected members of our kindred express an eczematous phenotype, reportedly most severe in members who develop leukemia. Pedigree analysis shows that the L472X mutation tracks with thrombocytopenia, acute leukemia, and eczema. The L472X mutation produces a stably expressed RUNX1 protein product with a corresponding decrease in wild type RUNX1 expression. Our data supports the inclusion of eczema in the FPDMM phenotype and suggests the possibility that the RUNX1 L472X mutant causes the type of dominant negative affect that is associated with an elevated risk of leukemia in FPDMM families.",2 4 0
"Diversity and functional consequences of germline and somatic PTPN11 mutations in human disease. || Adult Amino Acid Sequence Cohort Studies Female Germ-Line Mutation Humans Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins LEOPARD Syndrome Leukemia Male Mutation Noonan Syndrome Protein Conformation Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases || Germline mutations in PTPN11, the gene encoding the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, cause Noonan syndrome (NS) and the clinically related LEOPARD syndrome (LS), whereas somatic mutations in the same gene contribute to leukemogenesis. On the basis of our previously gathered genetic and biochemical data, we proposed a model that splits NS- and leukemia-associated PTPN11 mutations into two major classes of activating lesions with differential perturbing effects on development and hematopoiesis. To test this model, we investigated further the diversity of germline and somatic PTPN11 mutations, delineated the association of those mutations with disease, characterized biochemically a panel of mutant SHP-2 proteins recurring in NS, LS, and leukemia, and performed molecular dynamics simulations to determine the structural effects of selected mutations. Our results document a strict correlation between the identity of the lesion and disease and demonstrate that NS-causative mutations have less potency for promoting SHP-2 gain of function than do leukemia-associated ones. Furthermore, we show that the recurrent LS-causing Y279C and T468M amino acid substitutions engender loss of SHP-2 catalytic activity, identifying a previously unrecognized behavior for this class of missense PTPN11 mutations.",0
"Mutational screening of the USH2A gene in Spanish USH patients reveals 23 novel pathogenic mutations. || Adolescent Adult DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Mutation, Missense Phenotype Spain Usher Syndromes Young Adult || Usher Syndrome type II (USH2) is an autosomal recessive disorder, characterized by moderate to severe hearing impairment and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). Among the three genes implicated, mutations in the USH2A gene account for 74-90% of the USH2 cases. To identify the genetic cause of the disease and determine the frequency of USH2A mutations in a cohort of 88 unrelated USH Spanish patients, we carried out a mutation screening of the 72 coding exons of this gene by direct sequencing. Moreover, we performed functional minigene studies for those changes that were predicted to affect splicing. As a result, a total of 144 DNA sequence variants were identified. Based upon previous studies, allele frequencies, segregation analysis, bioinformatics' predictions and in vitro experiments, 37 variants (23 of them novel) were classified as pathogenic mutations. This report provide a wide spectrum of USH2A mutations and clinical features, including atypical Usher syndrome phenotypes resembling Usher syndrome type I. Considering only the patients clearly diagnosed with Usher syndrome type II, and results obtained in this and previous studies, we can state that mutations in USH2A are responsible for 76.1% of USH2 disease in patients of Spanish origin.",1 0
"Susceptibility of glucokinase-MODY mutants to inactivation by oxidative stress in pancreatic β-cells. || Animals Cell Line Cells, Cultured Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Glucokinase Glutathione Humans Hydrogen Peroxide Insulin-Secreting Cells Male Mice Mutation Nitric Oxide Oxidative Stress Phosphofructokinase-2 Protein Binding Rats Rats, Wistar || The posttranslational regulation of glucokinase (GK) differs in hepatocytes and pancreatic β-cells. We tested the hypothesis that GK mutants that cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (GK-MODY) show compromised activity and posttranslational regulation in β-cells. Activity and protein expression of GK-MODY and persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (PHHI) mutants were studied in β-cell (MIN6) and non-β-cell (H4IIE) models. Binding of GK to phosphofructo-2-kinase, fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase (PFK2/FBPase2) was studied by bimolecular fluorescence complementation in cell-based models. Nine of 11 GK-MODY mutants that have minimal effect on enzyme kinetics in vitro showed decreased specific activity relative to wild type when expressed in β-cells. A subset of these were stable in non-β-cells but showed increased inactivation in conditions of oxidative stress and partial reversal of inactivation by dithiothreitol. Unlike the GK-MODY mutants, four of five GK-PHHI mutants had similar specific activity to wild type and Y214C had higher activity than wild type. The GK-binding protein PFK2/FBPase2 protected wild-type GK from oxidative inactivation and the decreased stability of GK-MODY mutants correlated with decreased interaction with PFK2/FBPase2. Several GK-MODY mutants show posttranslational defects in β-cells characterized by increased susceptibility to oxidative stress and/or protein instability. Regulation of GK activity through modulation of thiol status may be a physiological regulatory mechanism for the control of GK activity in β-cells.",0
"Elevated rates of force development and MgATP binding in F764L and S532P myosin mutations causing dilated cardiomyopathy. || Adenosine Triphosphate Animals Calcium Cardiomyopathy, Dilated Heart Ventricles Humans In Vitro Techniques Kinetics Mice Mice, Transgenic Mutation, Missense Myocardial Contraction Ventricular Myosins || Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a disease characterized by dilation of the ventricular chambers and reduced contractile function. We examined the contractile performance of chemically-skinned ventricular strips from two heterozygous murine models of DCM-causing missense mutations of myosin, F764L/+ and S532P/+, in an α-myosin heavy chain (MyHC) background. In Ca(2+)-activated skinned myocardial strips, the maximum developed tension in F764L/+ was only ~50% that of litter-mate controls (+/+). The F764L/+ also exhibited significantly reduced rigor stiffness, loaded shortening velocity and power output. Corresponding indices for S532P/+ strips were not different from controls. Manipulation of MgATP concentration in conjunction with measures of viscoelasticity, which provides estimates of myosin detachment rate 2πc, allowed us to probe the molecular basis of changes in crossbridge kinetics that occur with the myosin mutations. By examining the response of detachment rate to varying MgATP we found the rate of MgADP release was unaffected by the myosin mutations. However, MgATP binding rate was higher in the DCM groups compared to controls (422±109mM(-1)·s(-1) in F764L/+, 483±74mM(-1)·s(-1) in S532P/+ and 303±18mM(-1)·s(-1) in +/+). In addition, the rate constant of force development, 2πb, was significantly higher in DCM groups compared to controls (at 5mM MgATP: 36.9±4.9s(-1) in F764L/+, 32.9±4.5s(-1) in S532P/+ and 18.2±1.7s(-1) in +/+). These results suggest that elevated rates of force development and MgATP binding are features of cardiac myofilament function that underlie the development of DCM.",0
"Molecular basis of phenotypic heterogeneity in phenylketonuria. || Alleles Denmark Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic Germany Humans Mutation Nucleic Acid Hybridization Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Phenylketonuria is a metabolic disorder that results from a deficiency of the hepatic enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase. Its clinical phenotype varies widely, and to date more than 10 mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene have been identified in persons with the disorder. We attempted to relate the clinical phenotype of patients to their genotype. We studied 258 patients with phenylketonuria from Denmark and Germany for the presence of eight mutations previously found in patients from these countries. The in vitro activity of the enzymes associated with these mutations was determined by expression analysis in heterologous mammalian cells. The level of activity was then used to predict the in vivo level of phenylalanine hydroxylase activity in patients with various combinations of mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase alleles. The eight mutations involved 64 percent of all mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase alleles in the patients. Expression analysis showed that these mutant enzymes produced from 0 to 50 percent of normal enzyme activity. The predicted level of phenylalanine hydroxylase activity correlated strongly with the pretreatment serum level of phenylalanine (r = 0.91, P less than 0.001 in the Danish patients and r = 0.74, P less than 0.001 in the German patients), phenylalanine tolerance in the Danish patients (r = 0.84, P less than 0.001), and the serum phenylalanine level measured after standardized oral protein loading in the German patients (r = 0.84, P less than 0.001). Our results strongly support the hypothesis that there is a molecular basis for phenotypic heterogeneity in phenylketonuria. The establishment of genotype will therefore aid in the prediction of biochemical and clinical phenotypes in patients with this disease.",0
"How do MYBPC3 mutations cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy? || Animals Calcium Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Codon, Nonsense Exons Frameshift Mutation Haploinsufficiency Humans Myocardium Nonsense Mediated mRNA Decay Peptide Chain Termination, Translational RNA Splicing RNA, Messenger || It is well established that MYBPC3 mutations are the most common cause of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, accounting for about half of identified mutations. However, when compared with mutations in other myofibrillar proteins that cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, MYBPC3 mutations seem to be the odd one out. The most striking characteristic of HCM mutations in MYBPC3 is that many are within introns and are predicted to cause aberrant splicing leading to a frameshift and a premature chain termination, yet the truncated peptides have never been identified in human heart tissue carrying these mutations. Instead of expression of a poison peptide we consistently observe haploinsufficiency of MyBP-C in MYBPC3 mutant human heart muscle. In this review we investigate the mechanism for MyBP-C haploinsufficiency and consider how this haploinsufficiency could cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.",0
"A novel splice-site mutation in the GJB2 gene causing mild postlingual hearing impairment. ||  || The DFNB1 subtype of autosomal recessive, nonsyndromic hearing impairment, caused by mutations affecting the GJB2 (connexin-26) [corrected] gene, is highly prevalent in most populations worldwide. DFNB1 hearing impairment is mostly severe or profound and usually appears before the acquisition of speech (prelingual onset), though a small number of hypomorphic missense mutations result in mild or moderate deafness of postlingual onset. We identified a novel GJB2 splice-site mutation, c. -22-2A>C, in three siblings with mild postlingual hearing impairment that were compound heterozygous for c. -22-2A>C and c.35delG. Reverse transcriptase-PCR experiments performed on total RNA extracted from saliva samples from one of these siblings confirmed that c. -22-2A>C abolished the acceptor splice site of the single GJB2 intron, resulting in the absence of normally processed transcripts from this allele. However, we did isolate transcripts from the c. -22-2A>C allele that keep an intact GJB2 coding region and that were generated by use of an alternative acceptor splice site previously unknown. The residual expression of wild-type connexin-26 [corrected] encoded by these transcripts probably underlies the mild severity and late onset of the hearing impairment of these subjects.",2 1 0
"Functional Investigations of HNF1A Identify Rare Variants as Risk Factors for Type 2 Diabetes in the General Population. || Cohort Studies Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Variation Genotype HeLa Cells Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Humans Male Odds Ratio Transcriptional Activation || Variants in HNF1A encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 1α (HNF-1A) are associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young form 3 (MODY 3) and type 2 diabetes. We investigated whether functional classification of HNF1A rare coding variants can inform models of diabetes risk prediction in the general population by analyzing the effect of 27 HNF1A variants identified in well-phenotyped populations (n = 4,115). Bioinformatics tools classified 11 variants as likely pathogenic and showed no association with diabetes risk (combined minor allele frequency [MAF] 0.22%; odds ratio [OR] 2.02; 95% CI 0.73-5.60; P = 0.18). However, a different set of 11 variants that reduced HNF-1A transcriptional activity to <60% of normal (wild-type) activity was strongly associated with diabetes in the general population (combined MAF 0.22%; OR 5.04; 95% CI 1.99-12.80; P = 0.0007). Our functional investigations indicate that 0.44% of the population carry HNF1A variants that result in a substantially increased risk for developing diabetes. These results suggest that functional characterization of variants within MODY genes may overcome the limitations of bioinformatics tools for the purposes of presymptomatic diabetes risk prediction in the general population.",0
"Protean PTEN: form and function. || Animals Disease Models, Animal Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Mice PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Proteus Syndrome Signal Transduction Structure-Activity Relationship Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Germline mutations distributed across the PTEN tumor-suppressor gene have been found to result in a wide spectrum of phenotypic features. Originally shown to be a major susceptibility gene for both Cowden syndrome (CS), which is characterized by multiple hamartomas and an increased risk of breast, thyroid, and endometrial cancers, and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, which is characterized by lipomatosis, macrocephaly, and speckled penis, the PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome spectrum has broadened to include Proteus syndrome and Proteus-like syndromes. Exon 5, which encodes the core motif, is a hotspot for mutations likely due to the biology of the protein. PTEN is a major lipid 3-phosphatase, which signals down the PI3 kinase/AKT pro-apoptotic pathway. Furthermore, PTEN is a protein phosphatase, with the ability to dephosphorylate both serine and threonine residues. The protein-phosphatase activity has also been shown to regulate various cell-survival pathways, such as the mitogen-activated kinase (MAPK) pathway. Although it is well established that PTEN's lipid-phosphatase activity, via the PI3K/AKT pathway, mediates growth suppression, there is accumulating evidence that the protein-phosphatase/MAPK pathway is equally important in the mediation of growth arrest and other crucial cellular functions.",3 0
"Functional characterization and pharmacological rescue of melanocortin-4 receptor mutations identified from obese patients. || Adolescent Cell Membrane Child Flow Cytometry Humans Imidazoles Infant Inhibitory Concentration 50 Ligands Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation Obesity Phenotype Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Signal Transduction || As the most common monogenic form of human obesity, about 130 naturally occurring melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) gene mutations have been identified. In this study, we reported detailed functional characterization of 10 novel human MC4R (hMC4R) mutants including R7C, C84R, S127L, S136F, W174C, A219V, P230L, F261S, I317V and L325F. Flow cytometry experiments showed that six mutants, including R7C, C84R, S127L, W174C, P230L and F261S, have decreased cell surface expression. The other four mutants are expressed at similar levels as the wild-type hMC4R. Binding assays showed that the mutants have similar binding affinities for the agonist and endogenous antagonist agouti-related protein. Signalling assays showed that S136F is defective in signalling. Multiple mutagenesis showed that S136 of hMC4R is required for the normal function of the receptor. To identify potential therapeutic approaches for patients with intracellularly retained MC4R mutants, we tested the effect of an MC4R inverse agonist, ML00253764, on C84R and W174C. We showed that ML00253764 could function as a pharmacological chaperone rescuing the mutant MC4Rs to the cell surface. The rescued mutants are functional with increased cAMP production in response to agonist stimulation. In conclusion, of 10 mutants we studied, 6 had decreased cell surface expression. Pharmacological chaperone is a potential approach for treating obesity caused by MC4R mutations that result in intracellular retention.",0
"The phenylalanine hydroxylase c.30C>G synonymous variation (p.G10G) creates a common exonic splicing silencer. || Alternative Splicing Amino Acid Motifs Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Genes, Reporter Heterogeneous-Nuclear Ribonucleoprotein Group F-H Humans Molecular Sequence Data Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Protein Binding Silencer Elements, Transcriptional Trinucleotide Repeats beta-Hexosaminidase beta Chain || PKU is caused by mutations in PAH. A c.30C>G synonymous variation in exon 1, previously reported as neutral, was observed in two patients. The variation creates a GGG triplet, which is part of several exonic splicing silencer (ESS) motifs. Because the 5'-splice site of PAH exon 1 is intrinsically weak and therefore could be responsive to a new flanking ESS, we hypothesized that c.30C>G could cause aberrant mRNA splicing. We demonstrate that c.30C>G causes aberrant mRNA splicing in two different reporter minigenes, and that this is abolished if a preexisting flanking GGG triplet is disrupted. GGG triplets are part of the consensus motif bound by splicing-inhibitory hnRNPH proteins and we observed a dramatic increase in hnRNPH binding to c.30C>G PAH RNA. We conclude that c.30C>G creates a hnRNPH-binding ESS, which can disrupt mRNA splicing. A disease-causing mutation in HEXB, which has previously been associated with exon skipping in patients also creates a GGG triplet. We show that the mutant HEXB motif causes exon skipping of a reporter minigene and that this is also influenced by a flanking GGG triplet. We suggest that aberrant splicing caused by creation/abolishment of GGG triplets located together with a preexisting flanking GGG triplet, may be an underreported cause of human disease. It is important to recognize that exonic sequence changes may disrupt mRNA splicing. This is particularly important in PAH, since PKU patients harboring such mutations are unlikely to respond to therapy with 6R-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)), despite the fact that the genetic code indicates otherwise.",3 1 0
"A diverse array of cancer-associated MTOR mutations are hyperactivating and can predict rapamycin sensitivity. || Animals Antibiotics, Antineoplastic Cell Line, Tumor Databases, Factual HEK293 Cells HeLa Cells Humans MAP Kinase Signaling System MCF-7 Cells Mechanistic Target of Rapamycin Complex 1 Mechanistic Target of Rapamycin Complex 2 Mice Mice, Nude Multiprotein Complexes Mutation Neoplasms Neoplasms, Experimental Protein Kinase Inhibitors Sirolimus TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays || Genes encoding components of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling axis are frequently mutated in cancer, but few mutations have been characterized in MTOR, the gene encoding the mTOR kinase. Using publicly available tumor genome sequencing data, we generated a comprehensive catalog of mTOR pathway mutations in cancer, identifying 33 MTOR mutations that confer pathway hyperactivation. The mutations cluster in six distinct regions in the C-terminal half of mTOR and occur in multiple cancer types, with one cluster particularly prominent in kidney cancer. The activating mutations do not affect mTOR complex assembly, but a subset reduces binding to the mTOR inhibitor DEPTOR. mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling in cells expressing various activating mutations remains sensitive to pharmacologic mTOR inhibition, but is partially resistant to nutrient deprivation. Finally, cancer cell lines with hyperactivating MTOR mutations display heightened sensitivity to rapamycin both in culture and in vivo xenografts, suggesting that such mutations confer mTOR pathway dependency.",0
"Germline mutations in CDH1 are infrequent in women with early-onset or familial lobular breast cancers. || Adult Age of Onset Antigens, CD Breast Neoplasms Cadherins Carcinoma, Lobular DNA Mutational Analysis Family Female Germ-Line Mutation Humans Middle Aged || Germline mutations in CDH1 are associated with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer; lobular breast cancer also occurs excessively in families with such condition. To determine if CDH1 is a susceptibility gene for lobular breast cancer in women without a family history of diffuse gastric cancer, germline DNA was analysed for the presence of CDH1 mutations in 318 women with lobular breast cancer who were diagnosed before the age of 45 years or had a family history of breast cancer and were not known, or known not, to be carriers of germline mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2. Cases were ascertained through breast cancer registries and high-risk cancer genetic clinics (Breast Cancer Family Registry, the kConFab and a consortium of breast cancer genetics clinics in the United States and Spain). Additionally, Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification was performed for 134 cases to detect large deletions. No truncating mutations and no large deletions were detected. Six non-synonymous variants were found in seven families. Four (4/318 or 1.3%) are considered to be potentially pathogenic through in vitro and in silico analysis. Potentially pathogenic germline CDH1 mutations in women with early-onset or familial lobular breast cancer are at most infrequent.",3 4 0
"Diverse biochemical properties of Shp2 mutants. Implications for disease phenotypes. || Calorimetry Enzyme Activation Humans Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Models, Molecular Models, Theoretical Mutation Noonan Syndrome Phenotype Protein Structure, Tertiary Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Recombinant Fusion Proteins SH2 Domain-Containing Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Signal Transduction Substrate Specificity || Mutations in the Src homology 2 (SH2)-containing protein-tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 (PTPN11) underlie half of the cases of the autosomal dominant genetic disorder Noonan syndrome, and somatic Shp2 mutations are found in several hematologic and solid malignancies. Earlier studies of small numbers of mutants suggested that disease-associated mutations cause constitutive (SH2 binding-independent) activation and that cancer-associated mutants are more active than those associated with Noonan syndrome. We have characterized a larger panel of Shp2 mutants and find that this ""activity-centric"" model cannot explain the behaviors of all pathogenic Shp2 mutations. Instead, enzymatic, structural, and mathematical modeling analyses show that these mutants can affect basal activation, SH2 domain-phosphopeptide affinity, and/or substrate specificity to varying degrees. Furthermore, there is no absolute correlation between the mutants' extents of basal activation and the diseases they induce. We propose that activated mutants of Shp2 modulate signaling from specific stimuli to a subset of effectors and provide a theoretical framework for understanding the complex relationship between Shp2 activation, intracellular signaling, and pathology.",0
"Cytoplasm-predominant Pten associates with increased region-specific brain tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine D2 receptors in mouse model with autistic traits. ||  || Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by impairment in social communication/interaction and inflexible/repetitive behavior. Several lines of evidence support genetic factors as a predominant cause of ASD. Among those autism susceptibility genes that have been identified, the PTEN tumor suppressor gene, initially identified as predisposing to Cowden heritable cancer syndrome, was found to be mutated in a subset of ASD patients with extreme macrocephaly. However, the ASD-relevant molecular mechanism mediating the effect of PTEN mutations remains elusive. We developed a Pten knock-in murine model to study the effects of Pten germline mutations, specifically altering subcellular localization, in ASD. Proteins were isolated from the hemispheres of the male littermates, and Western blots were performed to determine protein expression levels of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH). Immunohistochemical stains were carried out to validate the localization of TH and dopamine D2 receptors (D2R). PC12 cells ectopically expressing either wild-type or missense mutant PTEN were then compared for the differences in TH expression. Mice carrying Pten mutations have high TH and D2R in the striatum and prefrontal cortex. They also have increased phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and TH. Mechanistically, PTEN downregulates TH production in PC12 cells via inhibiting the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/CREB signaling pathway, while PTEN reduces TH phosphorylation via suppressing MAPK pathway. Unlike wild-type PTEN but similar to the mouse knock-in mutant Pten, three naturally occurring missense mutations of PTEN that we previously identified in ASD patients, H93R, F241S, and D252G, were not able to suppress TH when overexpressed in PC12 cells. In addition, two other PTEN missense mutations, C124S (pan phosphatase dead) and G129E (lipid phosphatase dead), failed to suppress TH when ectopically expressed in PC12 cells. Our data reveal a non-canonical PTEN-TH pathway in the brain that may work as a core regulator of dopamine signaling, which when dysfunctional is pathogenic in ASD.",0
"Mutant alpha-galactosidase A enzymes identified in Fabry disease patients with residual enzyme activity: biochemical characterization and restoration of normal intracellular processing by 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin. || 1-Deoxynojirimycin Animals Binding Sites Cell Communication Cells, Cultured Cercopithecus aethiops Enzyme Stability Fabry Disease Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic Humans Hydrogen-Ion Concentration Kinetics Models, Molecular Mutation Protein Structure, Tertiary Protein Transport alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by the deficiency of alpha-Gal A (alpha-galactosidase A) activity. In order to understand the molecular mechanism underlying alpha-Gal A deficiency in Fabry disease patients with residual enzyme activity, enzymes with different missense mutations were purified from transfected COS-7 cells and the biochemical properties were characterized. The mutant enzymes detected in variant patients (A20P, E66Q, M72V, I91T, R112H, F113L, N215S, Q279E, M296I, M296V and R301Q), and those found mostly in mild classic patients (A97V, A156V, L166V and R356W) appeared to have normal K(m) and V(max) values. The degradation of all mutants (except E59K) was partially inhibited by treatment with kifunensine, a selective inhibitor of ER (endoplasmic reticulum) alpha-mannosidase I. Metabolic labelling and subcellular fractionation studies in COS-7 cells expressing the L166V and R301Q alpha-Gal A mutants indicated that the mutant protein was retained in the ER and degraded without processing. Addition of DGJ (1-deoxygalactonojirimycin) to the culture medium of COS-7 cells transfected with a large set of missense mutant alpha-Gal A cDNAs effectively increased both enzyme activity and protein yield. DGJ was capable of normalizing intracellular processing of mutant alpha-Gal A found in both classic (L166V) and variant (R301Q) Fabry disease patients. In addition, the residual enzyme activity in fibroblasts or lymphoblasts from both classic and variant hemizygous Fabry disease patients carrying a variety of missense mutations could be substantially increased by cultivation of the cells with DGJ. These results indicate that a large proportion of mutant enzymes in patients with residual enzyme activity are kinetically active. Excessive degradation in the ER could be responsible for the deficiency of enzyme activity in vivo, and the DGJ approach may be broadly applicable to Fabry disease patients with missense mutations.",4 0
"Prospective functional classification of all possible missense variants in PPARG. || Amino Acid Substitution Case-Control Studies Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Humans Lipodystrophy Macrophages Male Mutation, Missense Myocardial Infarction PPAR gamma Prospective Studies || Clinical exome sequencing routinely identifies missense variants in disease-related genes, but functional characterization is rarely undertaken, leading to diagnostic uncertainty. For example, mutations in PPARG cause Mendelian lipodystrophy and increase risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Although approximately 1 in 500 people harbor missense variants in PPARG, most are of unknown consequence. To prospectively characterize PPARγ variants, we used highly parallel oligonucleotide synthesis to construct a library encoding all 9,595 possible single-amino acid substitutions. We developed a pooled functional assay in human macrophages, experimentally evaluated all protein variants, and used the experimental data to train a variant classifier by supervised machine learning. When applied to 55 new missense variants identified in population-based and clinical sequencing, the classifier annotated 6 variants as pathogenic; these were subsequently validated by single-variant assays. Saturation mutagenesis and prospective experimental characterization can support immediate diagnostic interpretation of newly discovered missense variants in disease-related genes.",4 0
"The importance of E-cadherin binding partners to evaluate the pathogenicity of E-cadherin missense mutations associated to HDGC. || Animals Antigens, CD Binding Sites CHO Cells Cadherins Catenins Cricetinae Cytoplasm Exocytosis Humans Molecular Biology Mutation, Missense Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor) Stomach Neoplasms Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases beta Catenin || In hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC), CDH1 germline gene alterations are causative events in 30% of the cases. In 20% of HDGC families, CDH1 germline mutations are of the missense type and the mutation carriers constitute a problem in terms of genetic counseling and surveillance. To access the pathogenic relevance of missense mutations, we have previously developed an in vitro method to functionally characterize them. Pathogenic E-cadherin missense mutants fail to aggregate and become more invasive, in comparison with cells expressing the wild-type (WT) protein. Herein, our aim was to develop a complementary method to unravel the pathogenic significance of E-cadherin missense mutations. We used cells stably expressing WT E-cadherin and seven HDGC-associated mutations (five intracellular and two extracellular) and studied by proximity ligation assays (PLA) how these mutants bind to fundamental regulators of E-cadherin function and trafficking. We focused our attention on the interaction with: p120, β-catenin, PIPKIγ and Hakai. We showed that cytoplasmic E-cadherin mutations affect the interaction of one or more binding partners, compromising the E-cadherin stability at the plasma membrane and likely affecting the adhesion complex competence. In the present work, we demonstrated that the study of the interplay between E-cadherin and its binding partners, using PLA, is an easy, rapid, quantitative and highly reproducible technique that can be applied in routine labs to verify the pathogenicity of E-cadherin missense mutants for HDGC diagnosis, especially those located in the intracellular domain of the protein.",0
"Gain-of-function SOS1 mutations cause a distinctive form of Noonan syndrome. || Animals COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Testing Humans Models, Molecular Mutation Noonan Syndrome SOS1 Protein Transfection || Noonan syndrome is a developmental disorder characterized by short stature, facial dysmorphia, congenital heart defects and skeletal anomalies. Increased RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling due to PTPN11 and KRAS mutations causes 50% of cases of Noonan syndrome. Here, we report that 22 of 129 individuals with Noonan syndrome without PTPN11 or KRAS mutation have missense mutations in SOS1, which encodes a RAS-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factor. SOS1 mutations cluster at codons encoding residues implicated in the maintenance of SOS1 in its autoinhibited form. In addition, ectopic expression of two Noonan syndrome-associated mutants induces enhanced RAS and ERK activation. The phenotype associated with SOS1 defects lies within the Noonan syndrome spectrum but is distinctive, with a high prevalence of ectodermal abnormalities but generally normal development and linear growth. Our findings implicate gain-of-function mutations in a RAS guanine nucleotide exchange factor in disease for the first time and define a new mechanism by which upregulation of the RAS pathway can profoundly change human development.",4 0
"Novel pharmacological MC4R agonists can efficiently activate mutated MC4R from obese patient with impaired endogenous agonist response. ||  || Human melanocortin 4 receptor (hMC4R) mutations with in vitro functional effects are responsible for 0.5-2.5% of severe obesity. Designing ligands that are able to counteract this in vitro-associated molecular defect is crucial to develop specific anti-obesity drugs in these genetically associated cases. We analyzed the in vitro effect of two novel melanocortin agonists, IRC-022493 and IRC-022511, on typical hMC4R mutations chosen based on the nature of their functional alterations, i.e. intracytoplasmic retention and/or reduced basal activity and/or reduced α-MSH potency. We assessed the in vitro ability of IRC-022493 and IRC-022511 to bind and activate hMC4R mutants. These mutations were found earlier in 11 obese French patients (median age (range) was 17.6 years (5.7-48.0) and body mass index (BMI)-Z-score 4.2 s.d. (1.5-5.5). The MC4R agonists were responsible for a significant activation of mutated hMC4R depending on the functional characteristics of the mutations. Both agonists were able to activate mutated hMC4R with decreased α-MSH potency, associated with or without decreased basal activity, to the same extent than α-MSH in wild-type MC4R. This result suggests that those mutations would be the best targets for the MC4R agonists among MC4R mutation-bearing obese patients. No specific clinical phenotype was associated with the differential response to pharmacological agonists. We identified two novel melanocortin agonists that were able in vitro to efficiently activate mutated hMC4R with impaired endogenous agonist functional response. These results stimulate interest in the development of these drugs for hMC4R mutations-associated obesity.",0
"PKU mutation (D143G) associated with an apparent high residual enzyme activity: expression of a kinetic variant form of phenylalanine hydroxylase in three different systems. ||  || We have used three complementary in vitro systems to express the human phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene at high levels. Recombinant PAH was expressed in Escherichia coli (as a fusion protein), in human kidney cells and in a cell-free in vitro transcription-translation system. These systems were used to characterize a novel kinetic variant form (D143G) of the enzyme. The recombinant D143G mutant enzyme had the same physicochemical properties as the wild-type PAH and was stable when expressed in eukaryotic cells. Enzyme activity studies of the D143G mutant enzyme, produced in the three expression systems, revealed a kinetic variant form with reduced affinity for L-Phe (about 2.4-fold increase in the S0.5 value) as well as reduced affinity for tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) (about 2-fold increase in the apparent Km). At standard assay conditions (1 mM L-Phe, t5 microM BH4) the residual activity of the mutant enzyme was high and variable (52%, 33%, and 102%) when analysed in the three different systems. The high residual activities of the mutant enzyme obtained at these conditions were not in agreement with the classical PKU phenotype found in a patient compound heterozygous for the termination mutation G272X and the novel D143G mutation. However, when the D143G mutant enzyme was assayed at lower concentrations of L-Phe (100-300 microM) and BH4 (10 microM) the residual activities were compatible with severely reduced hydroxylation of L-Phe and the classical PKU phenotype.",3 1 0
"Glycogen storage disease type II: identification of a dinucleotide deletion and a common missense mutation in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene. ||  || In nine Dutch patients with the infantile form of glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII), who were compound heterozygous for either 525delT or exon18del (1), sequence analysis was performed to search for the mutations in the second lysosomal alpha-glucosidase allele. One patient had a novel TG deletion at cDNA position 379 + 380. Surprisingly five of the nine patients had the same two base pair changes: A921 --> T and G925 --> A. The first change is a well-known polymorphism but the second one is a novel mutation and results in the substitution of Gly309 by Arg. By screening 43 other GSDII patients the same mutation was found in two other cases, one from The Netherlands and one from France. To verify its deleterious effect, the mutation was introduced in the wild type lysosomal alpha-glucosidase cDNA and expressed in COS cells.",1 0
"Loss-of-function of the voltage-gated sodium channel NaV1.5 (channelopathies) in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. || Adolescent Adult Aged Case-Control Studies Channelopathies Constipation DNA Mutational Analysis Diarrhea Female Gastrointestinal Motility Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genome-Wide Association Study HEK293 Cells Humans Irritable Bowel Syndrome Male Membrane Potentials Middle Aged Mutation, Missense NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Phenotype Prevalence Prospective Studies Risk Factors Transfection Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Blockers Young Adult || SCN5A encodes the α-subunit of the voltage-gated sodium channel NaV1.5. Many patients with cardiac arrhythmias caused by mutations in SCN5A also have symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). We investigated whether patients with IBS have SCN5A variants that affect the function of NaV1.5. We performed genotype analysis of SCN5A in 584 persons with IBS and 1380 without IBS (controls). Mutant forms of SCN5A were expressed in human embryonic kidney-293 cells, and functions were assessed by voltage clamp analysis. A genome-wide association study was analyzed for an association signal for the SCN5A gene, and replicated in 1745 patients in 4 independent cohorts of IBS patients and controls. Missense mutations were found in SCN5A in 13 of 584 patients (2.2%, probands). Diarrhea-predominant IBS was the most prevalent form of IBS in the overall study population (25%). However, a greater percentage of individuals with SCN5A mutations had constipation-predominant IBS (31%) than diarrhea-predominant IBS (10%; P < .05). Electrophysiologic analysis showed that 10 of 13 detected mutations disrupted NaV1.5 function (9 loss-of-function and 1 gain-of-function function). The p. A997T-NaV1.5 had the greatest effect in reducing NaV1.5 function. Incubation of cells that expressed this variant with mexiletine restored their sodium current and administration of mexiletine to 1 carrier of this mutation (who had constipation-predominant IBS) normalized their bowel habits. In the genome-wide association study and 4 replicated studies, the SCN5A locus was strongly associated with IBS. About 2% of patients with IBS carry mutations in SCN5A. Most of these are loss-of-function mutations that disrupt NaV1.5 channel function. These findings provide a new pathogenic mechanism for IBS and possible treatment options.",0
"Long-term weight-loss in gastric bypass patients carrying melanocortin 4 receptor variants. || Adolescent Adult Aged Alleles Body Weight Case-Control Studies Female Gastric Bypass Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Obesity Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Postoperative Period Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Time Factors Treatment Outcome Weight Loss Young Adult || The melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) critically regulates feeding and satiety. Rare variants in MC4R are predominantly found in obese individuals. Though some rare variants in MC4R discovered in patients have defects in localization, ligand binding and signaling to cAMP, many have no recognized defects. In our cohort of 1433 obese subjects that underwent Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass (RYGB) surgery, we found fifteen variants of MC4R. We matched rare variant carriers to patients with the MC4R reference alleles for gender, age, starting BMI and T2D to determine the variant effect on weight-loss post-RYGB. In vitro, we determined expression of mutant receptors by ELISA and western blot, and cAMP production by microscopy. While carrying a rare MC4R allele is associated with obesity, carriers of rare variants exhibited comparable weight-loss after RYGB to non-carriers. However, subjects carrying three of these variants, V95I, I137T or L250Q, lost less weight after surgery. In vitro, the R305Q mutation caused a defect in cell surface expression while only the I137T and C326R mutations showed impaired cAMP signaling. Despite these apparent differences, there was no correlation between in vitro signaling and pre- or post-surgery clinical phenotype. These data suggest that subtle differences in receptor signaling conferred by rare MC4R variants combined with additional factors predispose carriers to obesity. In the absence of complete MC4R deficiency, these differences can be overcome by the powerful weight-reducing effects of bariatric surgery. In a complex disorder such as obesity, genetic variants that cause subtle defects that have cumulative effects can be overcome after appropriate clinical intervention.",4 0
"Association of functionally significant Melanocortin-4 but not Melanocortin-3 receptor mutations with severe adult obesity in a large North American case-control study. || Adult Case-Control Studies Cell Line Cohort Studies Computational Biology Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Mutant Proteins Mutation North America Obesity, Morbid Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 3 Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Thinness || Functionally significant heterozygous mutations in the Melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) have been implicated in 2.5% of early onset obesity cases in European cohorts. The role of mutations in this gene in severely obese adults, particularly in smaller North American patient cohorts, has been less convincing. More recently, it has been proposed that mutations in a phylogenetically and physiologically related receptor, the Melanocortin-3 receptor (MC3R), could also be a cause of severe human obesity. The objectives of this study were to determine if mutations impairing the function of MC4R or MC3R were associated with severe obesity in North American adults. We studied MC4R and MC3R mutations detected in a total of 1821 adults (889 severely obese and 932 lean controls) from two cohorts. We systematically and comparatively evaluated the functional consequences of all mutations found in both MC4R and MC3R. The total prevalence of rare MC4R variants in severely obese North American adults was 2.25% (CI(95%): 1.44-3.47) compared with 0.64% (CI(95%): 0.26-1.43) in lean controls (P < 0.005). After classification of functional consequence, the prevalence of MC4R mutations with functional alterations was significantly greater when compared with controls (P < 0.005). In contrast, the prevalence of rare MC3R variants was not significantly increased in severely obese adults [0.67% (CI(95%): 0.27-1.50) versus 0.32% (CI(95%): 0.06-0.99)] (P = 0.332). Our results confirm that mutations in MC4R are a significant cause of severe obesity, extending this finding to North American adults. However, our data suggest that MC3R mutations are not associated with severe obesity in this population.",4 0
"Comparison of the protein-protein interfaces in the p53-DNA crystal structures: towards elucidation of the biological interface. || Amino Acid Motifs Computer Simulation Crystallography DNA Dimerization Protein Structure, Tertiary Software Time Factors Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || p53, the tumor suppressor protein, functions as a dimer of dimers. However, how the tetramer binds to the DNA is still an open question. In the crystal structure, three copies of the p53 monomers (containing chains A, B, and C) were crystallized with the DNA-consensus element. Although the structure provides crucial data on the p53-DNA contacts, the active oligomeric state is unclear because the two dimeric (A-B and B-C) interfaces present in the crystal cannot both exist in the tetramer. Here, we address the question of which of these two dimeric interfaces may be more biologically relevant. We analyze the sequence and structural properties of the p53-p53 dimeric interfaces and carry out extensive molecular dynamics simulations of the crystal structures of the human and mouse p53 dimers. We find that the A-B interface residues are more conserved than those of the B-C. Molecular dynamics simulations show that the A-B interface can provide a stable DNA-binding motif in the dimeric state, unlike B-C. Our results indicate that the interface between chains A-B in the p53-DNA complex constitutes a better candidate for a stable biological interface, whereas the B-C interface is more likely to be due to crystal packing. Thus, they have significant implications toward our understanding of DNA binding by p53 as well as p53-mediated interactions with other proteins.",0
"Alternative splicing in the alpha-galactosidase A gene: increased exon inclusion results in the Fabry cardiac phenotype. || Alternative Splicing Amino Acid Sequence Animals Base Sequence COS Cells Exons Fabry Disease Heart Diseases Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype RNA, Messenger Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Sequence Alignment alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is an inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism, resulting from deficient activity of lysosomal alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A). A rare alternative splicing that introduces a 57-nucleotide (nt) intronic sequence to the alpha-Gal A transcript from intron 4 of the gene has been identified. In addition, a novel midintronic base substitution that results in substantially increased alternative splicing has been identified in a patient with Fabry disease who has the cardiac variant phenotype. The sequence of the patient's intron 4 contains a single G-->A transversion at genomic nt 9331 (IVS4+919 G-->A ), located at the minus sign4 position of the 3' end of the intronic insertion (nts 9278--9334 in the genomic sequence). Minigene constructs containing the entire intron 4 sequence with G, A, C, or T at nt 9331 within an alpha-Gal A complementary DNA expression vector were prepared and expressed in COS-1 cells. Whereas transfection of the G or T minigenes transcribed predominantly normal-sized transcripts, the transfection of the A or C minigenes produced a large amount of the alternatively spliced transcript. These results suggest that the G-->A mutation, within an A/C-rich domain, results in increased recognition of the alternative splicing by an A/C-rich enhancer-type exonic splicing enhancer. The intronic mutation was not observed in 100 unrelated unaffected men but was present in 6 unrelated patients with cardiac Fabry disease. Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction of total RNA of various normal human tissues revealed that the alternatively spliced transcript was present in all of the samples, and especially at a higher ratio in the lung and muscle. The normal transcript was present in the patients' lymphoblasts and resulted in approximately 10% residual enzyme activity, leading to a cardiac phenotype of Fabry disease.",3 4 0
"Molecular characterization of phenylketonuric mutations in Japanese by analysis of phenylalanine hydroxylase mRNA from lymphoblasts. || Base Sequence Cell Line, Transformed Exons Frameshift Mutation Genes Japan Lymphocytes Molecular Sequence Data Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length || ",0
"Human homozygous R403W mutant cardiac myosin presents disproportionate enhancement of mechanical and enzymatic properties. || Actin Cytoskeleton Adenosine Triphosphatases Adenosine Triphosphate Adolescent Adult Animals Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Carrier Proteins Humans Molecular Motor Proteins Molecular Sequence Data Myosin Heavy Chains Point Mutation Rabbits Sequence Analysis, DNA || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) is associated with mutations in 11 genes encoding sarcomeric proteins. Most families present mutations in MYBPC3 and MYH7 encoding cardiac myosin-binding protein C and beta-myosin heavy chain. The consequences of MYH7 mutations have been extensively studied at the molecular level, but controversial results have been obtained with either reduced or augmented myosin motor function depending on the type or homogeneity of myosin studied. In the present study, we took advantage of the accessibility to an explanted heart to analyze for the first time the properties of human homozygous mutant myosin. The patient exhibited eccentric hypertrophy with severely impaired ejection fraction leading to heart transplantation, and carries a homozygous mutation in MYH7 (R403W) and a heterozygous variant in MYBPC3 (V896M). In situ analysis of the left ventricular tissue showed myocyte disarray and hypertrophy plus interstitial fibrosis. In vitro motility assays showed a small, but significant increase in sliding velocity of fluorescent-labeled actin filaments over human mutant cardiac myosin-coated surface compared to control (+18%; P<0.001). Mutant myosin exhibited a large increase in maximal actin-activated ATPase activity (+114%; P<0.05) and Km for actin (+87%; P<0.05) when compared to control. These data show disproportionate enhancement of mechanical and enzymatic properties of human mutant myosin. This suggests inefficient ATP utilization and reduced mechanical efficiency in the myocardial tissue of the patient, which could play an important role in the development of FHC phenotype.",4 0
"Frequency of Fabry disease in male and female haemodialysis patients in Spain. || Adult Aged, 80 and over Alleles Amino Acid Substitution Fabry Disease Female Genotype Heterozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Renal Dialysis Spain alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD), an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder, is caused by a reduced activity of the lysosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A. The disorder ultimately leads to organ damage (including renal failure) in males and females. However, heterozygous females usually present a milder phenotype with a later onset and a slower progression. A combined enzymatic and genetic strategy was used, measuring the activity of alpha-galactosidase A and genotyping the alpha-galactosidase A gene (GLA) in dried blood samples (DBS) of 911 patients undergoing haemodialysis in centers across Spain. GLA alterations were found in seven unrelated patients (4 males and 3 females). Two novel mutations (p.Gly346AlafsX347 and p.Val199GlyfsX203) were identified as well as a previously described mutation, R118C. The R118C mutation was present in 60% of unrelated patients with GLA causal mutations. The D313Y alteration, considered by some authors as a pseudo-deficiency allele, was also found in two out of seven patients. Excluding the controversial D313Y alteration, FD presents a frequency of one in 182 individuals (0.55%) within this population of males and females undergoing haemodialysis. Moreover, our findings suggest that a number of patients with unexplained and atypical symptoms of renal disease may have FD. Screening programmes for FD in populations of individuals presenting severe kidney dysfunction, cardiac alterations or cerebrovascular disease may lead to the diagnosis of FD in those patients, the study of their families and eventually the implementation of a specific therapy.",3 0
"Role of protein misfolding in DFNA9 hearing loss. || Animals Blotting, Western Cell Line Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel Extracellular Matrix Proteins Hearing Loss Humans Immunoprecipitation Mice Microscopy, Fluorescence Point Mutation Protein Folding Proteins || Mutations in the COCH (coagulation factor C homology) gene have been attributed to DFNA9 (deafness, autosomal-dominant 9), an autosomal-dominant non-syndromic hearing loss disorder. However, the mechanisms responsible for DFNA9 hearing loss remain unknown. Here, we demonstrate that mutant cochlin, the protein product of the COCH gene, forms a stable dimer that is sensitive to reducing agent. In contrast, wild-type (WT) cochlin may form only dimers transiently. Interestingly, the presence of mutant cochlin can stabilize WT cochlin in dimer conformation, providing a possible mechanism for the dominant nature of DFNA9 mutations. Furthermore, the expression of mutant cochlin eventually induces WT cochlin to form stable oligomers that are resistant to reducing agent. Finally, we show that mutant cochlin is cytotoxic in vitro and in vivo. Our study suggests a possible molecular mechanism underlying DFNA9 hearing loss and provides an in vitro model that may be used to explore protein-misfolding diseases in general.",0
"Human gene-centered transcription factor networks for enhancers and disease variants. || Disease Enhancer Elements, Genetic Gene Regulatory Networks Genome-Wide Association Study Humans Mutation Transcription Factors Two-Hybrid System Techniques || Gene regulatory networks (GRNs) comprising interactions between transcription factors (TFs) and regulatory loci control development and physiology. Numerous disease-associated mutations have been identified, the vast majority residing in non-coding regions of the genome. As current GRN mapping methods test one TF at a time and require the use of cells harboring the mutation(s) of interest, they are not suitable to identify TFs that bind to wild-type and mutant loci. Here, we use gene-centered yeast one-hybrid (eY1H) assays to interrogate binding of 1,086 human TFs to 246 enhancers, as well as to 109 non-coding disease mutations. We detect both loss and gain of TF interactions with mutant loci that are concordant with target gene expression changes. This work establishes eY1H assays as a powerful addition to the toolkit of mapping human GRNs and for the high-throughput characterization of genomic variants that are rapidly being identified by genome-wide association studies.",0
"Validation of LDLr Activity as a Tool to Improve Genetic Diagnosis of Familial Hypercholesterolemia: A Retrospective on Functional Characterization of LDLr Variants. || DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Testing Genetic Variation Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Mutation Phenotype Receptors, LDL Retrospective Studies || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by high blood-cholesterol levels mostly caused by mutations in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLr). With a prevalence as high as 1/200 in some populations, genetic screening for pathogenic LDLr mutations is a cost-effective approach in families classified as 'definite' or 'probable' FH and can help to early diagnosis. However, with over 2000 LDLr variants identified, distinguishing pathogenic mutations from benign mutations is a long-standing challenge in the field. In 1998, the World Health Organization (WHO) highlighted the importance of improving the diagnosis and prognosis of FH patients thus, identifying LDLr pathogenic variants is a longstanding challenge to provide an accurate genetic diagnosis and personalized treatments. In recent years, accessible methodologies have been developed to assess LDLr activity in vitro, providing experimental reproducibility between laboratories all over the world that ensures rigorous analysis of all functional studies. In this review we present a broad spectrum of functionally characterized missense LDLr variants identified in patients with FH, which is mandatory for a definite diagnosis of FH.",0
"The activity of wild type and mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase with respect to the C-oxidation of phenylalanine and the S-oxidation of S-carboxymethyl-L-cysteine. || Carbocysteine Humans Kinetics Mutation, Missense Oxidation-Reduction Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Substrate Specificity || The involvement of the enzyme, phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), in the S-oxidation of S-carboxymethyl-L-cysteine (SCMC) is now firmly established in man and rat. However, the underlying role of the molecular genetics of PAH in dictating and influencing the S-oxidation polymorphism of SCMC metabolism is as yet unknown. In this work we report that the S-oxidation of SCMC was dramatically reduced in the tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) responsive mutant PAH proteins (I65T, R68S, R261Q, V388M and Y414C) with these enzymes possessing between 1.2% and 2.0% of the wild type PAH activity when SCMC was used as substrate. These same mutant proteins express between 23% and 76% of the wild type PAH activity when phenylalanine was used as the substrate. The PAH mutant proteins (R158Q, I174T and R408W) that result in the classical phenylketonuria (PKU) phenotype expressing 0.2-1.8% of the wild type PAH activity when using phenylalanine as substrate were found to have <0.1% of the wild type PAH activity when SCMC was used as the substrate. Mutations that result in PAH proteins retaining some residual PAH activity with phenylalanine as substrate have <2.0% residual activity when SCMC was used as a substrate. This investigation has led to the hypothesis that the S-oxidation polymorphism in man is a consequence of an individual carrying one mutant PAH allele which has resulted in the loss of the ability of the residual PAH protein to undertake the S-oxidation of SCMC in vivo.",0
"Pompe disease: early diagnosis and early treatment make a difference. || Age Factors Child, Preschool Early Diagnosis Echocardiography, Doppler Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Genetic Therapy Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Neonatal Screening Prognosis Risk Assessment Survival Rate Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II or acid maltase deficiency) is a lysosomal disorder in which acid α-glucosidase (GAA) deficiencies lead to intralysosomal accumulation of glycogen in all tissues; most notably in skeletal muscles. Both the patient's age at the onset of Pompe disease symptoms and the rate of deterioration caused by the disease can vary considerably. In classical infant-onset Pompe disease (IOPD), symptoms start very early in life, and death occurs soon afterward if the disease remains untreated. In later-onset Pompe disease, symptoms are slower to appear, and patients often progress to wheelchair confinement and eventual respiratory failure. A diagnosis can be made by screening for GAA in dried blood samples, followed either by GAA assessment in lymphocytes or in fibroblasts or by the genetic analysis of mutations. Treatment by enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with alglucosidase alfa was approved for human use in 2006. In classical IOPD, treatment significantly lengthens survival and improves motor development and cardiac function. The sooner ERT begins, the better are the results. Newborn screening aims to take advantage of different technologies for diagnosing and treating newborns early on and it yields better outcomes. However, newborns diagnosed early and other long-term survivors may encounter fresh problems, making up a new phenotype of IOPD patients. Further modifications of the treatment, such as a decrease in immune responses to ERT, a higher dosage, a better uptake formulation, and gene therapy delivered locally or systemically are being explored.",0
"Identification of seven novel germline mutations in the human E-cadherin (CDH1) gene. ||  || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is a cancer predisposition syndrome caused by germline mutation of the gene encoding the tumour-suppressor E-cadherin (CDH1). We describe the search for CDH1 mutations in 36 new diffuse gastric cancer families. All 16 CDH1 exons, neighbouring intronic sequence and an essential promoter region were screened by DNA sequencing. We detected nine different mutations, seven of which were novel. Of the seven novel mutations, five were identified in families who met the IGCLC clinical criteria for HDGC. Two mutations resulted in a premature stop codon and truncation of the protein. Three mutations affected splice sites; two of the splice-site mutations were shown by RT-PCR to disturb normal CDH1 splicing, while the third splice-site mutation was present in two unrelated HDGC families. The remaining two mutations resulted in amino acid substitutions and impaired the ability of E-cadherin protein to form cellular aggregates and suppress invasion in vitro. Together with the occurrence of extra-gastric tumours such as lobular breast and colorectal cancer, these findings further extend the types of CDH1 mutations and the spectrum of tumours associated with HDGC.",2 4 0 3
"Long-term treatment and diagnosis of tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive hyperphenylalaninemia with a mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. || Biopterin Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || A novel therapeutic strategy for phenylketonuria (PKU) has been initiated in Japan. A total of 12 patients who met the criteria for tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4))-responsive hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) with a mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) (EC 1.14.16.1) gene were recruited at 12 medical centers in Japan between June 1995 and July 2001. Therapeutic efficacy of BH(4) was evaluated in single-dose, four-dose, and 1-wk BH(4) loading tests followed by long-term BH(4) treatment, and also examined in relation to the PAH gene mutations. The endpoints were determined as the percentage decline in serum phenylalanine from initial values after single-dose (>20%), four-dose (>30%), and 1-wk BH(4) (>50%) loading tests. Patients with mild PKU exhibiting decreases in blood phenylalanine concentrations of >20% in the single-dose test also demonstrated decreases of >30% in the four-dose test. The 1-wk test elicited BH(4) responsiveness even in patients with poor responses in the shorter tests. Patients with mild HPA, many of whom carry the R241C allele, responded to BH(4) administration. No clear correlation was noted between the degree of decrease in serum phenylalanine concentrations in the single- or four-dose tests and specific PAH mutations. The 1-wk test (20 mg/kg of BH(4) per day) is the most sensitive test for the diagnosis of BH(4)-responsive PAH deficiency. Responsiveness apparently depends on mutations in the PAH gene causing mild PKU, such as R241C. BH(4) proved to be an effective therapy that may be able to replace or liberalize the phenylalanine-restricted diets for a considerable number of patients with mild PKU.",3 1 0
"Germline intronic and exonic mutations in the Wilms' tumour gene (WT1) affecting urogenital development. || Alternative Splicing Base Sequence DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Female Genes, Wilms Tumor Genotype Germ Cells Humans Introns Male Molecular Sequence Data Phenotype Syndrome Urogenital Abnormalities Urogenital System || Denys-Drash syndrome is a rare human developmental disorder affecting the urogenital system and leading to renal failure, intersex disorders and Wilms' tumour. In this report, four individuals with this syndrome are described carrying germline point mutations in the Wilms' tumour suppressor gene, WT1. Three of these mutations were in the zinc finger domains of WT1. The fourth occurred within intron 9, preventing splicing at one of the alternatively chosen splice donor sites of exon 9 when assayed in vitro. These results provide genetic evidence for distinct functional roles of the WT1 isoforms in urogenital development.",0
"Intracellular retention is a common characteristic of childhood obesity-associated MC4R mutations. || Amino Acid Sequence Cell Line Cell Membrane Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Female Gene Expression Genetic Variation Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Obesity Pedigree Prevalence Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Corticotropin Transfection || Heterozygous mutations in the coding region of the serpentine Melanocortin 4 receptor are the most common genetic cause of human obesity described to date. There are still conflicting data regarding the overall prevalence of such mutations in obesity and limited information is available on the functional defects caused by most obesity-associated MC4R mutations. We report here the screening for mutations in the coding region of the MC4R of a new cohort of 172 patients presenting with severe childhood obesity and a family history of obesity. Three heterozygous MC4R mutations (Ser127Leu, Ala244Glu and Pro299His) were found in three patients of this cohort (1.74%), confirming that such mutations are implicated in a significant number of childhood obesity cases. A functional analysis of these mutant receptors, in addition to 11 other childhood obesity-associated MC4R mutations, indicates that they all alter the activation of the receptor by the endogenous agonist alpha-MSH. To further examine the functional defects caused by childhood obesity-associated MC4R mutations, we developed a novel, sensitive technique to quantitatively analyze the effect of a mutation on MC4R cell surface expression. Using this method we analyzed the cell surface expression of all the 14 described childhood obesity-associated MC4R missense mutations. We demonstrate that 81.3% of childhood obesity-associated heterozygous MC4R mutations lead to intracellular retention of the receptor. This result has implications for the potential pharmacologic rescue of childhood obesity-associated MC4R mutations and for the treatment of patients presenting with this condition.",4 0
"Glucosylceramide synthase inhibition with lucerastat lowers globotriaosylceramide and lysosome staining in cultured fibroblasts from Fabry patients with different mutation types. ||  || Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by mutations in the GLA gene coding for α-galactosidase A (α-GalA). The deleterious mutations lead to accumulation of α-GalA substrates, including globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) and globotriaosylsphingosine. Progressive glycolipid storage results in cellular dysfunction, leading to organ damage and clinical disease, i.e. neuropathic pain, impaired renal function and cardiomyopathy. Many Fabry patients are treated by bi-weekly intravenous infusions of replacement enzyme. While the only available oral therapy is an α-GalA chaperone, which is indicated for a limited number of patients with specific 'amenable' mutations. Lucerastat is an orally bioavailable inhibitor of glucosylceramide synthase (GCS) that is in late stage clinical development for Fabry disease. Here we investigated the ability of lucerastat to lower Gb3, globotriaosylsphingosine and lysosomal staining in cultured fibroblasts from 15 different Fabry patients. Patients' cells included 13 different pathogenic variants, with 13 cell lines harboring GLA mutations associated with the classic disease phenotype. Lucerastat dose dependently reduced Gb3 in all cell lines. For 13 cell lines the Gb3 data could be fit to an IC50 curve, giving a median IC50 [interquartile range (IQR)] = 11 μM (8.2-18); the median percent reduction (IQR) in Gb3 was 77% (70-83). Lucerastat treatment also dose dependently reduced LysoTracker Red staining of acidic compartments. Lucerastat's effects in the cell lines were compared to those with current treatments-agalsidase alfa and migalastat. Consequently, the GCS inhibitor lucerastat provides a viable mechanism to reduce Gb3 accumulation and lysosome volume, suitable for all Fabry patients regardless of genotype.",0
"A global suppressor motif for p53 cancer mutants. || Animals Cell Line Cricetinae Genes, Suppressor Genes, p53 Humans Mutagenesis Neoplasms Polymerase Chain Reaction || The transcription factor and tumor suppressor protein p53 is frequently inactivated in human cancers. In many cases, p53 gene mutations result in high levels of inactive, full-length p53 protein with one amino acid change in the core domain that recognizes p53 DNA-binding sites. The ability to endow function to mutated p53 proteins would dramatically improve cancer therapy, because it would reactivate a central apoptotic pathway. By using genetic strategies and p53 assays in yeast and mammalian cells, we identified a global suppressor motif involving codons 235, 239, and 240. These intragenic suppressor mutations, either alone or in combination, restored function to 16 of 30 of the most common p53 cancer mutants tested. The 235-239-240 suppressor motif establishes that manipulation of a small region of the core domain is sufficient to activate a large number of p53 cancer mutants. Understanding the structural basis of the rescue mechanism will allow the pursuit of small compounds able to achieve a similar stabilization of p53 cancer mutants.",0
"Analysis of trafficking, stability and function of human connexin 26 gap junction channels with deafness-causing mutations in the fourth transmembrane helix. || Animals Cell Line Cell Membrane Connexin 26 Connexins Deafness Gap Junctions Humans Models, Molecular Mutation Permeability Protein Conformation Protein Interaction Domains and Motifs Protein Isoforms Protein Multimerization Protein Stability Protein Structure, Secondary Protein Transport Sf9 Cells || Human Connexin26 gene mutations cause hearing loss. These hereditary mutations are the leading cause of childhood deafness worldwide. Mutations in gap junction proteins (connexins) can impair intercellular communication by eliminating protein synthesis, mis-trafficking, or inducing channels that fail to dock or have aberrant function. We previously identified a new class of mutants that form non-functional gap junction channels and hemichannels (connexons) by disrupting packing and inter-helix interactions. Here we analyzed fourteen point mutations in the fourth transmembrane helix of connexin26 (Cx26) that cause non-syndromic hearing loss. Eight mutations caused mis-trafficking (K188R, F191L, V198M, S199F, G200R, I203K, L205P, T208P). Of the remaining six that formed gap junctions in mammalian cells, M195T and A197S formed stable hemichannels after isolation with a baculovirus/Sf9 protein purification system, while C202F, I203T, L205V and N206S formed hemichannels with varying degrees of instability. The function of all six gap junction-forming mutants was further assessed through measurement of dye coupling in mammalian cells and junctional conductance in paired Xenopus oocytes. Dye coupling between cell pairs was reduced by varying degrees for all six mutants. In homotypic oocyte pairings, only A197S induced measurable conductance. In heterotypic pairings with wild-type Cx26, five of the six mutants formed functional gap junction channels, albeit with reduced efficiency. None of the mutants displayed significant alterations in sensitivity to transjunctional voltage or induced conductive hemichannels in single oocytes. Intra-hemichannel interactions between mutant and wild-type proteins were assessed in rescue experiments using baculovirus expression in Sf9 insect cells. Of the four unstable mutations (C202F, I203T, L205V, N206S) only C202F and N206S formed stable hemichannels when co-expressed with wild-type Cx26. Stable M195T hemichannels displayed an increased tendency to aggregate. Thus, mutations in TM4 cause a range of phenotypes of dysfunctional gap junction channels that are discussed within the context of the X-ray crystallographic structure.",0
"Pilot study of newborn screening for six lysosomal storage diseases using Tandem Mass Spectrometry. || Dried Blood Spot Testing Enzyme Assays Fabry Disease Female Galactosylceramidase Gaucher Disease Glucosylceramidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Iduronidase Infant, Newborn Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell Lysosomal Storage Diseases Male Mucopolysaccharidosis I Neonatal Screening Niemann-Pick Diseases Sphingomyelin Phosphodiesterase Tandem Mass Spectrometry alpha-Galactosidase alpha-Glucosidases || There is current expansion of newborn screening (NBS) programs to include lysosomal storage disorders because of the availability of treatments that produce an optimal clinical outcome when started early in life. To evaluate the performance of a multiplex-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) enzymatic activity assay of 6 lysosomal enzymes in a NBS laboratory for the identification of newborns at risk for developing Pompe, Mucopolysaccharidosis-I (MPS-I), Fabry, Gaucher, Niemann Pick-A/B, and Krabbe diseases. Enzyme activities (acid α-glucosidase (GAA), galactocerebrosidase (GALC), glucocerebrosidase (GBA), α-galactosidase A (GLA), α-iduronidase (IDUA) and sphingomyeline phosphodiesterase-1 (SMPD-1)) were measured on ~43,000 de-identified dried blood spot (DBS) punches, and screen positive samples were submitted for DNA sequencing to obtain genotype confirmation of disease risk. The 6-plex assay was efficiently performed in the Washington state NBS laboratory by a single laboratory technician at the bench using a single MS/MS instrument. The number of screen positive samples per 100,000 newborns were as follows: GAA (4.5), IDUA (13.6), GLA (18.2), SMPD1 (11.4), GBA (6.8), and GALC (25.0). A 6-plex MS/MS assay for 6 lysosomal enzymes can be successfully performed in a NBS laboratory. The analytical ranges (enzyme-dependent assay response for the quality control HIGH sample divided by that for all enzyme-independent processes) for the 6-enzymes with the MS/MS is 5- to 15-fold higher than comparable fluorimetric assays using 4-methylumbelliferyl substrates. The rate of screen positive detection is consistently lower for the MS/MS assay compared to the fluorimetric assay using a digital microfluidics platform.",0
"Dominant-negative features of mutant TP53 in germline carriers have limited impact on cancer outcomes. || Alleles Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Haploinsufficiency Humans Neoplasms Phenotype Precancerous Conditions Transcriptional Activation Treatment Outcome Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Germline TP53 mutations result in cancer proneness syndromes known as Li-Fraumeni, Li-Fraumeni-like, and nonsyndromic predisposition with or without family history. To explore genotype/phenotype associations, we previously adopted a functional classification of all germline TP53 mutant alleles based on transactivation. Severe deficiency (SD) alleles were associated with more severe cancer proneness syndromes, and a larger number of tumors, compared with partial deficiency (PD) alleles. Because mutant p53 can exert dominant-negative (DN) effects, we addressed the relationship between DN and clinical manifestations. We reasoned that DN effects might be stronger in familial cancer cases associated with germline TP53 mutations, where mutant alleles coexist with the wild-type allele since conception. We examined 104 p53 mutant alleles with single amino acid substitutions described in the IARC germline database for (i) transactivation capability and (ii) capacity to reduce the activity of the wild-type allele (i.e., DN effect) using a quantitative yeast-based assay. The functional classifications of p53 alleles were then related to clinical variables. We confirmed that a classification based on transactivation alone can identify familial cancer cases with more severe clinical features. Classification based on DN effects allowed us to highlight similar associations but did not reveal distinct clinical subclasses of SD alleles, except for a correlation with tumor tissue prevalence. We conclude that in carriers of germline TP53 mutations transactivation-based classification of TP53 alleles appears more important for genotype/phenotype correlations than DN effects and that haplo-insufficiency of the TP53 gene is an important factor in cancer proneness in humans.",0
"Measurement of urinary CDH and CTH by tandem mass spectrometry in patients hemizygous and heterozygous for Fabry disease. ||  || Fabry disease is an X-linked disorder of glycosphingolipid metabolism resulting from a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A. This deficiency leads to the progressive accumulation, in lysosomes of visceral tissues and in body fluids of hemizygotes, of the glycosphingolipids globotriaosylceramide (CTH, Gb(3) or GL-3) and galabiosylceramide (CDH) and to a lesser extent the blood group AB and B related glycolipids. Elevated levels of the glycosphingolipids are found in the urine of hemizygous males with the classic phenotype, but it is not known whether all symptomatic or asymptomatic heterozygotes have elevated levels. We have therefore measured CTH and CDH quantitatively in a multiplex assay using tandem mass spectrometry in urine from a large cohort (44) of genetically proven or obligate heterozygotes including four with the N215S mutation, from classic hemizygotes (28), from cardiac variant hemizygotes with the N215S mutation (6) and from normal controls. The levels of CTH and CDH were related to both creatinine and sphingomyelin. Urinary CTH was elevated in all 28 classic hemizygotes but only in 4/6 of the cardiac variants. The level was within or just above the normal reference range in the four individuals heterozygous for the N215S mutation but was elevated in 38/40 of the other heterozygotes. Similar results were obtained for CDH, except that only 34/40 heterozygotes had an elevated level. The level of CDH was not elevated in the four heterozygotes and 4/6 of the hemizygotes for the N215S mutation. Combining the levels of CTH and CDH did not improve the discrimination of heterozygotes from controls. The ratio of CDH to CTH was higher in heterozygotes than in hemizygotes. Measurement of urinary CTH gave the best discrimination of heterozygotes from controls.",3 0
"Transcriptional control of SLC26A4 is involved in Pendred syndrome and nonsyndromic enlargement of vestibular aqueduct (DFNB4). || Alleles Amino Acid Sequence Animals Binding Sites COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops Conserved Sequence Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay Female Forkhead Transcription Factors Genes, Reporter Genetic Testing Hearing Loss Heterozygote Humans Luciferases Membrane Transport Proteins Mice Models, Genetic Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Promoter Regions, Genetic Protein Binding Protein Structure, Tertiary Sequence Homology, Amino Acid Siblings Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Trans-Activators Transcription, Genetic Vestibular Aqueduct || Although recessive mutations in the anion transporter gene SLC26A4 are known to be responsible for Pendred syndrome (PS) and nonsyndromic hearing loss associated with enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA), also known as ""DFNB4,"" a large percentage of patients with this phenotype lack mutations in the SLC26A4 coding region in one or both alleles. We have identified and characterized a key transcriptional regulatory element in the SLC26A4 promoter that binds FOXI1, a transcriptional activator of SLC26A4. In nine patients with PS or nonsyndromic EVA, a novel c.-103T-->C mutation in this regulatory element interferes with FOXI1 binding and completely abolishes FOXI1-mediated transcriptional activation. We have also identified six patients with mutations in FOXI1 that compromise its ability to activate SLC26A4 transcription. In one family, the EVA phenotype segregates in a double-heterozygous mode in the affected individual who carries single mutations in both SLC26A4 and FOXI1. This finding is consistent with our observation that EVA occurs in the Slc26a4(+/-); Foxi1(+/-) double-heterozygous mouse mutant. These results support a novel dosage-dependent model for the molecular pathogenesis of PS and nonsyndromic EVA that involves SLC26A4 and its transcriptional regulatory machinery.",1 0
"The alpha-galactosidase A p.Arg118Cys variant does not cause a Fabry disease phenotype: data from individual patients and family studies. || Adult Alleles Amino Acid Substitution Codon Fabry Disease Family Health Female Gene Frequency Genotype Humans Kidney Male Middle Aged Molecular Structure Mutation Phenotype alpha-Galactosidase || Lysosomal α-galactosidase A (α-Gal) is the enzyme deficient in Fabry disease (FD), an X-linked glycosphingolipidosis caused by pathogenic mutations affecting the GLA gene. The early-onset, multi-systemic FD classical phenotype is associated with absent or severe enzyme deficiency, as measured by in vitro assays, but patients with higher levels of residual α-Gal activity may have later-onset, more organ-restricted clinical presentations. A change in the codon 118 of the wild-type α-Gal sequence, replacing basic arginine by a potentially sulfhydryl-binding cysteine residue - GLA p.(Arg118Cys) -, has been recurrently described in large FD screening studies of high-risk patients. Although the Cys118 allele is associated with high residual α-Gal activity in vitro, it has been classified as a pathogenic mutation, mainly on the basis of theoretical arguments about the chemistry of the cysteine residue. However its pathogenicity has never been convincingly demonstrated by pathology criteria. We reviewed the clinical, biochemical and histopathology data obtained from 22 individuals of Portuguese and Spanish ancestry carrying the Cys118 allele, including 3 homozygous females. Cases were identified either on the differential diagnosis of possible FD manifestations and on case-finding studies (n=11; 4 males), or on unbiased cascade screening of probands' close relatives (n=11; 3 males). Overall, those data strongly suggest that the GLA p.(Arg118Cys) variant does not segregate with FD clinical phenotypes in a Mendelian fashion, but might be a modulator of the multifactorial risk of cerebrovascular disease. The Cys118 allelic frequency in healthy Portuguese adults (n=696) has been estimated as 0.001, therefore not qualifying for ""rare"" condition.",2 0 3
"A pathogenic role for germline PTEN variants which accumulate into the nucleus. || Active Transport, Cell Nucleus Animals Autism Spectrum Disorder COS Cells Catalytic Domain Cell Line, Tumor Cell Nucleus Cercopithecus aethiops Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Mutation, Missense Nuclear Localization Signals PTEN Phosphohydrolase || The PTEN gene encodes a master regulator protein that exerts essential functions both in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus. PTEN is mutated in the germline of both patients with heterogeneous tumor syndromic diseases, categorized as PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS), and a group affected with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Previous studies have unveiled the functional heterogeneity of PTEN variants found in both patient cohorts, making functional studies necessary to provide mechanistic insights related to their pathogenicity. Here, we have functionally characterized a PTEN missense variant [c.49C>G; p.(Gln17Glu); Q17E] associated to both PHTS and ASD patients. The PTEN Q17E variant displayed partially reduced PIP3-catalytic activity and normal stability in cells, as shown using S. cerevisiae and mammalian cell experimental models. Remarkably, PTEN Q17E accumulated in the nucleus, in a process involving the PTEN N-terminal nuclear localization sequence. The analysis of additional germline-associated PTEN N-terminal variants illustrated the existence of a PTEN N-terminal region whose targeting in disease causes PTEN nuclear accumulation, in parallel with defects in PIP3-catalytic activity in cells. Our findings highlight the frequent occurrence of PTEN gene mutations targeting PTEN N-terminus whose pathogenicity may be related, at least in part, with the retention of PTEN in the nucleus. This could be important for the implementation of precision therapies for patients with alterations in the PTEN pathway.",0
"Functional characterization of the common c.-32-13T>G mutation of GAA gene: identification of potential therapeutic agents. || Cells, Cultured Exons Glycogen Storage Disease Type II HeLa Cells Heterogeneous-Nuclear Ribonucleoproteins Humans Mutation Nuclear Proteins RNA Splicing RNA, Messenger RNA-Binding Proteins Ribonucleoproteins Serine-Arginine Splicing Factors Splicing Factor U2AF alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II is a lysosomal storage disorder due to mutations of the GAA gene, which causes lysosomal alpha-glucosidase deficiency. Clinically, glycogen storage disease type II has been classified in infantile and late-onset forms. Most late-onset patients share the leaky splicing mutation c.-32-13T>G. To date, the mechanism by which the c.-32-13T>G mutation affects the GAA mRNA splicing is not fully known. In this study, we demonstrate that the c.-32-13T>G mutation abrogates the binding of the splicing factor U2AF65 to the polypyrimidine tract of exon 2 and that several splicing factors affect exon 2 inclusion, although the only factor capable of acting in the c.-32-13 T>G context is the SR protein family member, SRSF4 (SRp75). Most importantly, a preliminary screening using small molecules described to be able to affect splicing profiles, showed that resveratrol treatment resulted in a significant increase of normal spliced GAA mRNA, GAA protein content and activity in cells transfected with a mutant minigene and in fibroblasts from patients carrying the c-32-13T>G mutation. In conclusion, this work provides an in-depth functional characterization of the c.-32-13T>G mutation and, most importantly, an in vitro proof of principle for the use of small molecules to rescue normal splicing of c.-32-13T>G mutant alleles.",0
"Characterization of p53 mutants identified in human tumors with a missense mutation in the tetramerization domain. ||  || p53 is very often mutated in human cancers. The majority of alterations are missense mutations located within the DNA-binding domain of the protein. Many reports have characterized such mutant proteins. Little is known, however, about the properties of proteins that have a missense mutation outside this domain. We investigated here the properties of 8 mutant proteins identified in human tumors as having a missense mutation in the tetramerization domain. The Arg342Gln, Glu349Asp and Gln354Arg proteins behaved like wild-type both in vitro and in cells. Two mutants, Arg342Pro and Leu344Pro, were inactive in all assays. Finally, the 3 mutant proteins Leu330His, Arg337Cys and Arg337Leu, which are inactive in vitro, showed no activity at low expression levels in cells but became active at higher expression levels. Our results reveal new phenotypes for p53 mutants and suggest that sequencing of the p53 gene from patients with tumors should be extended to exons 9 and 10 in clinical investigations.",0
"Genotype-phenotype correlation in Pompe disease, a step forward. || Actinin Angiotensinogen Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Mutation PPAR alpha Peptidyl-Dipeptidase A Phenotype || Pompe's disease is a progressive myopathy caused by mutations in the lysosomal enzyme acid alphaglucosidase gene (GAA). A wide clinical variability occurs also in patients sharing the same GAA mutations, even within the same family. For a large series of GSDII patients we collected some clinical data as age of onset of the disease, presence or absence of muscular pain, Walton score, 6-Minute Walking Test, Vital Capacity, and Creatine Kinase. DNA was extracted and tested for GAA mutations and some genetic polymorphisms able to influence muscle properties (ACE, ACTN3, AGT and PPARα genes).We compared the polymorphisms analyzed in groups of patients with Pompe disease clustered for their homogeneous genotype. We have been able to identify four subgroups of patients completely homogeneous for their genotype, and two groups homogeneous as far as the second mutation is defined ""very severe"" or ""potentially less severe"". When disease free life was studied we observed a high significant difference between groups. The DD genotype in the ACE gene and the XX genotype in the ACTN3 gene were significantly associated to an earlier age of onset of the disease. The ACE DD genotype was also associated to the presence of muscle pain. We demonstrate that ACE and ACTN3 polymorphisms are genetic factors able to modulate the clinical phenotype of patients affected with Pompe disease.",1 0
"Mutations Ivs4nt1, 47delCT, and G148S identified in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene by RT-PCR of illegitimate transcripts and chemical cleavage of mismatch. ||  || ",3 1 0
"The parvalbumin/somatostatin ratio is increased in Pten mutant mice and by human PTEN ASD alleles. || Alleles Animals Autism Spectrum Disorder Cell Count Cell Death Cell Proliferation Cell Shape Electroencephalography GABAergic Neurons Gamma Rhythm Humans Integrases Interneurons Interpersonal Relations Median Eminence Mice Mutation Neural Stem Cells PTEN Phosphohydrolase Parvalbumins Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt Pyramidal Cells Signal Transduction Somatostatin || Mutations in the phosphatase PTEN are strongly implicated in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Here, we investigate the function of Pten in cortical GABAergic neurons using conditional mutagenesis in mice. Loss of Pten results in a preferential loss of SST(+) interneurons, which increases the ratio of parvalbumin/somatostatin (PV/SST) interneurons, ectopic PV(+) projections in layer I, and inhibition onto glutamatergic cortical neurons. Pten mutant mice exhibit deficits in social behavior and changes in electroencephalogram (EEG) power. Using medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) transplantation, we test for cell-autonomous functional differences between human PTEN wild-type (WT) and ASD alleles. The PTEN ASD alleles are hypomorphic in regulating cell size and the PV/SST ratio in comparison to WT PTEN. This MGE transplantation/complementation assay is efficient and is generally applicable for functional testing of ASD alleles in vivo.",0
"The effect of a single base pair deletion (delta T525) and a C1634T missense mutation (pro545leu) on the expression of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase in patients with glycogen storage disease type II. || Adolescent Adult Base Sequence Cell Line Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17 Female Gene Deletion Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Molecular Sequence Data Point Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII, Pompe's disease) is caused by an autosomal recessive inheritance of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase deficiency. By sequence analysis we have identified the mutations in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) of two unrelated patients, who have one and two copies, respectively, of the same missense mutation. The milder affected adult patient was found to be homozygous for a C1634T transition resulting in the substitution of pro545 by leu. The more severely affected adolescent patient had this same mutant allele combined with a 1 base pair deletion (delta T525) in the second allele causing premature termination at nucleotide positions 658-660. Both these mutations were introduced in wild-type alpha-glucosidase cDNA and expressed in COS-1 cells to analyse their effect. The delta T525 mutation prohibits the formation of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase completely. The pro545-->leu substitution is compatible with normal synthesis but hampers enzyme maturation and results in a 92% net loss of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase activity. The patient with adult GSDII has, in accordance with the allelic constitution, a 2-fold higher residual activity than the patient with juvenile GSDII. The delta T525 deletion was detected in two other unrelated patients, and also the C1634T transition was encountered in two more Caucasian patients with GSDII.",1 0
"PTEN mutations in eight Spanish families and one Brazilian family with Cowden syndrome. || Adolescent Adult Aged Brazil Child Child, Preschool Exons Family Health Female Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Spain Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Cowden syndrome is an autosomal dominant genodermatosis, characterized by the presence of multiple hamartomas in the skin, breast, thyroid, gastrointestinal tract, central nervous system, and an increased risk in developing breast and thyroid carcinomas. Over 80 germline mutations of the tumor suppressor gene PTEN, on chromosome 10q23, have been reported in more than 100 unrelated patients and families; however, questions regarding distribution of the mutations in populations from different geographic areas, and phenotypic expression are still unclear. In this study the results are reported of mutation analysis of PTEN in 13 families from Spain and one family of Brazilian origin with Cowden syndrome. PTEN germline mutations were detected in nine of them (64%). Five mutations were located in exon 5, one in exon 6, two in exon 7, and one in exon 8. Four of the mutations were novel. In another case, an identical change had been previously reported as a somatic mutation in an endometrial carcinoma. In one family, the patient presented a de novo mutation, which was not detected in his parents. In five patients, the detection of the PTEN germline mutation confirmed their condition, even in the absence of sufficient criteria to make the clinical diagnosis of Cowden syndrome.",0
"Cochlin immunostaining of inner ear pathologic deposits and proteomic analysis in DFNA9 deafness and vestibular dysfunction. || Adult Amino Acid Sequence Animals Deafness Ear, Inner Extracellular Matrix Proteins Glaucoma Humans Immunohistochemistry Mice Models, Genetic Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Protein Isoforms Protein Structure, Tertiary Proteins Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Temporal Bone Vestibular Diseases || Seven missense mutations and one in-frame deletion mutation have been reported in the coagulation factor C homology (COCH) gene, causing the adult-onset, progressive sensorineural hearing loss and vestibular disorder at the DFNA9 locus. Prevalence of COCH mutations worldwide is unknown, as there is no systematic screening effort for late-onset hearing disorders; however, to date, COCH mutations have been found on four continents and the possibility of COCH playing an important role in presbycusis and disorders of imbalance has been considered. Cochlin (encoded by COCH) has also been shown as a major target antigen for autoimmune sensorineural hearing loss. In this report, we present histopathology, immunohistochemistry and proteomic analyses of inner ear tissues from post-mortem DFNA9 temporal bone samples of an individual from a large Dutch kindred segregating the P51S mutation and adult human unaffected controls, and wild-type (+/+) and Coch null (-/-) knock-out mice. DFNA9 is an inner ear disorder with a unique histopathology showing loss of cellularity and aggregation of abundant homogeneous acellular eosinophilic deposits in the cochlear and vestibular labyrinths, similar to protein aggregation in well-known neurodegenerative disorders. By immunohistochemistry on the DFNA9 temporal bone sections, we have shown cochlin staining of the characteristic cochlear and vestibular deposits, indicating aggregation of cochlin in the same structures in which it is normally expressed. Proteomic analysis identified cochlin as the most abundant protein in mouse and human cochleae. The high-level expression and stability of cochlin in the inner ear, even in the absence and severe atrophy of the fibrocytes that normally express COCH, are shown through these studies and further elucidate the pathobiologic events occurring in DFNA9 leading to hearing loss and vestibular dysfunction.",0
"Cancer-associated PTEN mutants act in a dominant-negative manner to suppress PTEN protein function. || Animals Embryo, Mammalian Female Humans Loss of Heterozygosity Male Mice Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Protein Multimerization Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt Signal Transduction || PTEN dysfunction plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of hereditary and sporadic cancers. Here, we show that PTEN homodimerizes and, in this active conformation, exerts lipid phosphatase activity on PtdIns(3,4,5)P3. We demonstrate that catalytically inactive cancer-associated PTEN mutants heterodimerize with wild-type PTEN and constrain its phosphatase activity in a dominant-negative manner. To study the consequences of homo- and heterodimerization of wild-type and mutant PTEN in vivo, we generated Pten knockin mice harboring two cancer-associated PTEN mutations (PtenC124S and PtenG129E). Heterozygous Pten(C124S/+) and Pten(G129E/+) cells and tissues exhibit increased sensitivity to PI3-K/Akt activation compared to wild-type and Pten(+/-) counterparts, whereas this difference is no longer apparent between Pten(C124S/-) and Pten(-/-) cells. Notably, Pten KI mice are more tumor prone and display features reminiscent of complete Pten loss. Our findings reveal that PTEN loss and PTEN mutations are not synonymous and define a working model for the function and regulation of PTEN.",0
"p53 gain-of-function cancer mutants induce genetic instability by inactivating ATM. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Animals Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins Cell Cycle Cell Cycle Proteins Cell Transformation, Neoplastic Cells, Cultured DNA Breaks, Double-Stranded DNA Repair Enzymes DNA-Binding Proteins Fibroblasts Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic Genomic Instability Histones Humans MRE11 Homologue Protein Mice Mice, Transgenic Mutation Neoplasms Nuclear Proteins Phosphorylation Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-mdm2 Signal Transduction Thymus Gland Transcription, Genetic Translocation, Genetic Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Tumor Suppressor Proteins Ultraviolet Rays || Tp53 is the most commonly mutated tumour-suppressor gene in human cancers. In addition to the loss of tumour-suppression function, some missense mutants gain novel oncogenic activities. To elucidate the nature of the gain of function, we introduced the most common p53 cancer mutations (R248W and R273H) independently into the humanized p53 knock-in (HUPKI) allele in mice. Tumour-suppressor functions of p53 are abolished in p53-mutant mice. Several lines of evidence further indicate gain-of-function of p53 mutants in promoting tumorigenesis. p53(R248W) mice rapidly succumb to certain types of cancers not commonly observed in p53(-/-) mice. Interchromosomal translocations, a type of genetic instability rarely observed in p53(-/-) cells, are readily detectable in p53-mutant pre-tumor thymocytes. Although normal in p53(-/-) mouse cells, the G(2)-M checkpoint is impaired in p53-mutant cells after DNA damage. These acquired oncogenic properties of mutant p53 could be explained by the findings that these p53 mutants interact with the nuclease Mre11 and suppress the binding of the Mre11-Rad50-NBS1 (MRN) complex to DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs), leading to impaired Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) activation. Therefore, p53 gain-of-function mutants promote tumorigenesis by a novel mechanism involving active disruption of critical DNA damage-response pathways.",0
"Two missense mutations causing mild hyperphenylalaninemia associated with DNA haplotype 12. ||  || The genetic defects responsible for most phenylketonuria (PKU) and hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) cases are located in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. Approximately 50-60 mutations have been reported in Caucasians and are reflected in a wide range of clinical severities. Most mutations are linked to specific haplotypes, as defined by eight polymorphic restriction sites in the PAH gene. We hypothesized that there is at least one mild mutation linked to haplotype 12 in the Swedish PKU/HPA population, since 7 of 8 patients carrying haplotype 12 had mild HPA. Sequence analysis revealed a C-to-G transversion at the second base of codon 322, resulting in a substitution of glycine for alanine, in four mutant haplotype 12 genes, and a G-to-A transition at the second base of codon 408, resulting in a substitution of glutamine for arginine, in another three mutant haplotype 12 genes. These mutations segregated with mutant haplotype 12 alleles in nuclear families but were not present on normal or other mutant alleles. Both mutations were tested in a eukaryotic expression system in which enzyme activities of different mutant PAH enzymes reflect the relative severities of the mutations, although these in vitro activities cannot be translated directly into in vivo hepatic activities. The A322G mutant PAH had about 75% and the R408Q mutant PAH about 55% of the wild-type PAH enzyme activity. These in vitro activities are the highest reported for mutant PAH enzymes produced in the same expression system.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)",1 0
"From clinicogenetic studies of maturity-onset diabetes of the young to unraveling complex mechanisms of glucokinase regulation. || Binding Sites Blood Glucose Carrier Proteins Crystallography, X-Ray Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Enzyme Stability Genetic Testing Glucokinase Glucose Humans Hyperglycemia Kinetics Mutant Proteins Mutation Protein Binding Protein Structure, Secondary Protein Structure, Tertiary || Glucokinase functions as a glucose sensor in pancreatic beta-cells and regulates hepatic glucose metabolism. A total of 83 probands were referred for a diagnostic screening of mutations in the glucokinase (GCK) gene. We found 11 different mutations (V62A, G72R, L146R, A208T, M210K, Y215X, S263P, E339G, R377C, S453L, and IVS5 + 1G>C) in 14 probands. Functional characterization of recombinant glutathionyl S-transferase-G72R glucokinase showed slightly increased activity, whereas S263P and G264S had near-normal activity. The other point mutations were inactivating. S263P showed marked thermal instability, whereas the stability of G72R and G264S differed only slightly from that of wild type. G72R and M210K did not respond to an allosteric glucokinase activator (GKA) or the hepatic glucokinase regulatory protein (GKRP). Mutation analysis of the role of glycine at position 72 by substituting E, F, K, M, S, or Q showed that G is unique since all these mutants had very low or no activity and were refractory to GKRP and GKA. Structural analysis provided plausible explanations for the drug resistance of G72R and M210K. Our study provides further evidence that protein instability in combination with loss of control by a putative endogenous activator and GKRP could be involved in the development of hyperglycemia in maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 2. Furthermore, based on data obtained on G264S, we propose that other and still unknown mechanisms participate in the regulation of glucokinase.",0
"Myopathy caused by HRAS germline mutations: implications for disturbed myogenic differentiation in the presence of constitutive HRas activation. || Abnormalities, Multiple Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Germ-Line Mutation Humans Molecular Sequence Data Muscle Spindles Muscular Diseases Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras) Sequence Analysis, DNA Signal Transduction || Rare reports on patients with congenital myopathy with excess of muscle spindles (CMEMS), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and variable features resembling Noonan syndrome have been published, but the genetic basis of this condition is so far unknown. We analysed PTPN11 and RAS genes in five unrelated patients with this phenotype, and found HRAS mutations in four of them. Two disease-associated mutations, G12V and G12S, have previously been observed in patients with Costello syndrome (CS), and two other mutations, E63K and Q22K, are novel. All four mutations are predicted to enhance downstream HRas signalling, suggesting that CMEMS is a developmental consequence of sustained HRas activation in skeletal muscle. This type of myopathy may represent a previously unrecognized manifestation of CS. However, some patients carrying HRAS mutations may exhibit prominent congenital muscular dysfunction, although features of CS may be less obvious, suggesting that germline HRAS mutations may underlie some cases of otherwise unclassified neonatal neuromuscular disorders.",0
"Mutations in the human melanocortin-4 receptor gene associated with severe familial obesity disrupts receptor function through multiple molecular mechanisms. || Humans Mutation Obesity Protein Structure, Secondary Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Corticotropin || Mutations in the melanocortin-4 receptor gene (MC4R) represent the commonest monogenic cause of human obesity. However, information regarding the precise effects of such mutations on receptor function is very limited. We examined the functional properties of 12 different mutations in human MC4R that result in severe, familial, early-onset obesity. Of the nine missense mutants studied, four were completely unable to generate cAMP in response to ligand and five were partially impaired. Four showed evidence of impaired cell surface expression and six of reduced binding affinity for ligand. One mutation in the C-terminal tail, I316S, showed reduced affinity for alpha-MSH but retained normal affinity for the antagonist AgRP. None of the mutations inhibited signaling through co-transfected wild-type receptors. Thus, in the most comprehensive study to date of the functional properties of naturally occurring MC4R mutations we have (1) established that defective expression on the cell surface is a common mechanism impairing receptor function, (2) identified mutations which specifically affect ligand binding affinity thus aiding the definition of receptor structure-function relationships, (3) provided evidence against the notion that these receptor mutants act as dominant-negatives, and (4) identified a potentially novel molecular mechanism of receptor dysfunction whereby a mutation alters the relative affinities of a receptor for its natural agonist versus antagonist.",0
"In vitro expression analysis of mutations in phenylalanine hydroxylase: linking genotype to phenotype and structure to function. ||  || Mutations in the human phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) altering the expressed cDNA nucleotide sequence (GenBank U49897) can impair activity of the corresponding enzyme product (hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase, PAH) and cause hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA), a metabolic phenotype for which the major disease form is phenylketonuria (PKU; OMIM 261600). In vitro expression analysis of inherited human mutations in eukaryotic, prokaryotic, and cell-free systems is informative about the mechanisms of mutation effects on enzymatic activity and their predicted effect on the metabolic phenotype. Corresponding analysis of site-directed mutations in rat Pah cDNA has assigned critical functional roles to individual amino acid residues within the best understood species of phenylalanine hydroxylase. Data on in vitro expression of 35 inherited human mutations and 22 created rat mutations are reviewed here. The core data are accessible at the PAH Mutation Analysis Consortium Web site (http://www.mcgill.ca/pahdb).",0
"Illegitimate transcription of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in lymphocytes for identification of mutations in phenylketonuria. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Codon DNA Exons Glutamates Glutamic Acid Glycine Humans Infant Leucine Liver Lymphocytes Male Molecular Sequence Data Oligodeoxyribonucleotides Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Point Mutation Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Transcription, Genetic || Taking advantage of the 'illegitimate' transcription of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene, we have been able to analyse the PAH cDNA sequence of hyperphenylalaninemic children in circulating lymphocytes. Using this approach, we have also identified 3 novel mutations in cDNA from liver and lymphocytes of two patients. One mutation, detected by the abnormal pattern of migration of an amplified fragment, is a C to T transition in the splice acceptor site of intron 10, which resulted in the skipping of exon 11 with the premature termination of RNA translation downstream from exon 12 (-3 IVS10). The other two mutations are missense mutations in exons 10 and 11 (respectively, L333F and E390G). The present study supports the view that circulating lymphocytes give easy access to PAH gene transcripts whose nucleotide sequence is identical to that reported in liver and therefore represent a useful tool for molecular genetic studies in phenylketonuria.",3 1 0
"A comprehensive functional analysis of PTEN mutations: implications in tumor- and autism-related syndromes. || Alanine Amino Acid Sequence Aspartic Acid Autistic Disorder Catalytic Domain DNA Mutational Analysis Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutagenesis Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphatidylinositol Phosphates Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Saccharomyces cerevisiae Structure-Activity Relationship || The PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog) phosphatase is unique in mammals in terms of its tumor suppressor activity, exerted by dephosphorylation of the lipid second messenger PIP(3) (phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate), which activates the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt/mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) oncogenic pathway. Loss-of-function mutations in the PTEN gene are frequent in human cancer and in the germline of patients with PTEN hamartoma tumor-related syndromes (PHTSs). In addition, PTEN is mutated in patients with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), although no functional information on these mutations is available. Here, we report a comprehensive in vivo functional analysis of human PTEN using a heterologous yeast reconstitution system. Ala-scanning mutagenesis at the catalytic loops of PTEN outlined the critical role of residues within the P-catalytic loop for PIP(3) phosphatase activity in vivo. PTEN mutations that mimic the P-catalytic loop of mammalian PTEN-like proteins (TPTE, TPIP, tensins and auxilins) affected PTEN function variably, whereas tumor- or PHTS-associated mutations targeting the PTEN P-loop produced complete loss of function. Conversely, Ala-substitutions, as well as tumor-related mutations at the WPD- and TI-catalytic loops, displayed partial activity in many cases. Interestingly, a tumor-related D92N mutation was partially active, supporting the notion that the PTEN Asp92 residue might not function as the catalytic general acid. The analysis of a panel of ASD-associated hereditary PTEN mutations revealed that most of them did not substantially abrogate PTEN activity in vivo, whereas most of PHTS-associated mutations did. Our findings reveal distinctive functional patterns among PTEN mutations found in tumors and in the germline of PHTS and ASD patients, which could be relevant for therapy.",0
"Mutations in COCH that result in non-syndromic autosomal dominant deafness (DFNA9) affect matrix deposition of cochlin. || Amino Acid Sequence Amino Acid Substitution Deafness Endoplasmic Reticulum Extracellular Matrix Extracellular Matrix Proteins Genes, Dominant HeLa Cells Humans Models, Molecular Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Protein Conformation Proteins Recombinant Proteins Restriction Mapping Transfection || The COCH gene mutated in autosomal dominant sensorineural deafness (DFNA9) encodes cochlin, a major constituent of the inner ear extracellular matrix. Sequence analysis of cochlin from DFNA9 patients identified five distinct single-amino-acid mutations within a conserved region (the LCCL domain) of cochlin. To define the molecular basis of DFNA9, we have generated myc-tagged wild-type and mutant cochlins and explored their behavior in transient transfection systems. Western blotting of cell lysates and culture media indicates that wild-type and mutant cochlins are synthesized and secreted in similar amounts. Immunofluorescent staining confirms that all are detected within the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi complex of transfected cells. Our findings suggest that COCH mutations are unlikely to cause abnormalities in secretion and suggest that extracellular events might cause DFNA9 pathology. In agreement, we show that wild-type cochlin accumulates in extracellular deposits that closely parallel the matrix component fibronectin, whereas mutant cochlins vary in the amount and pattern of extracellular material. Whereas some mutants exhibit an almost normal deposition pattern, some show complete lack of deposition. Our results suggest that DFNA9 results from gene products that fail to integrate correctly into the extracellular matrix. The partial or complete penetrance of integration defects suggests that DFNA9 pathology may be caused by multiple molecular mechanisms, including compromised ability of cochlin to self-assemble or to form appropriate complexes with other matrix components.",0
"Loss of function in phenylketonuria is caused by impaired molecular motions and conformational instability. || Administration, Oral Allosteric Regulation Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Amino Acid Sequence Amino Acid Substitution Binding Sites Biopterin Catalytic Domain Computer Simulation Dimerization Endopeptidase K Enzyme Stability Female Hot Temperature Humans Hydrogen Bonding Hydrolysis Hydrophobic and Hydrophilic Interactions Infant, Newborn Kinetics Luminescence Male Models, Molecular Motion Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Protein Conformation Protein Denaturation Protein Folding Protein Structure, Secondary Protein Structure, Tertiary Protein Subunits Recombinant Fusion Proteins Static Electricity || A significant share of patients with phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency benefits from pharmacological doses of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)), the natural PAH cofactor. Phenylketonuria (PKU) is hypothesized to be a conformational disease, with loss of function due to protein destabilization, and the restoration of enzyme function that is observed in BH(4) treatment might be transmitted by correction of protein misfolding. To elucidate the molecular basis of functional impairment in PAH deficiency, we investigated the impact of ten PAH gene mutations identified in patients with BH(4)-responsiveness on enzyme kinetics, stability, and conformation of the protein (F55L, I65S, H170Q, P275L, A300S, S310Y, P314S, R408W, Y414C, Y417H). Residual enzyme activity was generally high, but allostery was disturbed in almost all cases and pointed to altered protein conformation. This was confirmed by reduced proteolytic stability, impaired tetramer assembly or aggregation, increased hydrophobicity, and accelerated thermal unfolding--with particular impact on the regulatory domain--observed in most variants. Three-dimensional modeling revealed the involvement of functionally relevant amino acid networks that may communicate misfolding throughout the protein. Our results substantiate the view that PAH deficiency is a protein-misfolding disease in which global conformational changes hinder molecular motions essential for physiological enzyme function. Thus, PKU has evolved from a model of a genetic disease that leads to severe neurological impairment to a model of a treatable protein-folding disease with loss of function.",0
"Identification of pathogenic mechanisms of COCH mutations, abolished cochlin secretion, and intracellular aggregate formation: genotype-phenotype correlations in DFNA9 deafness and vestibular disorder. || Deafness Extracellular Matrix Proteins Genotype Glycosylation Humans Mutation Phenotype Protein Folding Vestibular Diseases || Mutations in COCH (coagulation factor C homology) cause autosomal-dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss with variable degrees of clinical onset and vestibular malfunction. We selected eight uncharacterized mutations and performed immunocytochemical and Western blot analyses to track cochlin through the secretory pathway. We then performed a comprehensive analysis of clinical information from DFNA9 patients with all 21 known COCH mutations in conjunction with cellular and molecular findings to identify genotype-phenotype correlations. Our studies revealed that five mutants were not secreted into the media: two von Willebrand factor A (vWFA) domain mutants, which were not transported from the endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi complex and formed high-molecular-weight aggregates in cell lysates, and three LCCL domain mutants, which were detected as intracellular dimeric cochlins. Mutant cochlins that were not secreted and accumulated in cells result in earlier age of onset of hearing defects. In addition, individuals with LCCL domain mutations show accompanying vestibular dysfunction, whereas those with vWFA domain mutations exhibit predominantly hearing loss. This is the first report showing failure of mutant cochlin transport through the secretory pathway, abolishment of cochlin secretion, and formation and retention of dimers and large multimeric intracellular aggregates, and high correlation with earlier onset and progression of hearing loss in individuals with these DFNA9-causing mutations.",0
"Molecular genetics of tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. ||  || Mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene result in phenylketonuria (PKU). Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4))-responsive hyperphenylalaninemia has been recently described as a variant of PAH deficiency caused by specific mutations in the PAH gene. It has been suggested that BH(4)-responsiveness may be predicted from the corresponding genotypes. Data from BH(4) loading tests indicated an incidence of BH(4)-responsiveness of >40% in the general PKU population and >80% in mild PKU patients. The current project entailed genotype analysis of 315 BH(4)-responsive patients tabulated in the BIOPKUdb database and comparison with the data from the PAHdb locus-specific knowledgebase, as well as with previously published PAH mutations for several European countries, Northern China, and South Korea. We identified 57 mutations, presenting with a substantial residual PAH activity (average approximately 47%), presumed to be associated with BH(4)-responsiveness. More than 89% of patients are found to be compound heterozygotes. The three most common mutations found in >5% of BH(4)-responsive patients are p.A403 V, p.R261Q, and p.Y414C. Using the Hardy-Weinberg formula the predicted average frequency of BH(4)-responsiveness in European populations was calculated to be 55% (range 17-79%, lowest in Baltic countries and Poland and highest in Spain), 57% in Northern China, and 55% for South Korea. The genotype-predicted prevalence of BH(4)-responsiveness was higher than prevalence data obtained from BH(4) loading tests. Inconsistent results were observed for mutations p.L48S, p.I65 T, p.R158Q, p.R261Q, and p.Y414C. Our data suggest that BH(4)-responsiveness may be more common than assumed and to some extent may be predicted or excluded from the patient's genotype.",3 1 0
"Functional defects in six ryanodine receptor isoform-1 (RyR1) mutations associated with malignant hyperthermia and their impact on skeletal excitation-contraction coupling. || Animals Caffeine Calcium Cell Membrane Central Nervous System Stimulants Collagen Cresols DNA, Complementary Dose-Response Relationship, Drug Drug Combinations Herpesvirus 1, Human Immunoblotting Inhibitory Concentration 50 Laminin Magnesium Malignant Hyperthermia Mice Muscle Contraction Muscle, Skeletal Muscles Mutation Potassium Chloride Protein Structure, Tertiary Proteoglycans Rabbits Ryanodine Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel || Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal pharmacogenetic disorder of skeletal muscle that segregates with >60 mutations within the MHS-1 locus on chromosome 19 coding for ryanodine receptor type 1 (RyR1). Although some MHRyR1s have been shown to enhance sensitivity to caffeine and halothane when expressed in non-muscle cells, their influence on EC coupling can only be studied in skeletal myotubes. We therefore expressed WTRyR1, six of the most common human MHRyR1s (R163C, G341R, R614C, R2163C, V2168M, and R2458H), and a newly identified C-terminal mutation (T4826I) in dyspedic myotubes to study their functional defects and how they influence EC coupling. Myotubes expressing any MHRyR1 were significantly more sensitive to stimulation by caffeine and 4-CmC than those expressing WTRyR1. The hypersensitivity of MH myotubes extended to K+ depolarization. MH myotubes responded to direct channel activators with maximum Ca2+ amplitudes consistently smaller than WT myotubes, whereas the amplitude of their responses to depolarization were consistently larger than WT myotubes. The magnitudes of responses attainable from myotubes expressing MHRyR1s are therefore related to the nature of the stimulus rather than size of the Ca2+ store. The functional changes of MHRyR1s were directly analyzed using [3H]ryanodine binding analysis of isolated myotube membranes. Although none of the MHRyR1s examined significantly altered EC50 for Ca2+ activation, many failed to be completely inhibited by a low Ca2+ (<or=100 nm), and all were significantly more responsive to caffeine than WTRyR1 at Ca2+ concentrations that approximate those in resting myotubes. All seven mutations had diminished sensitivity to inhibition by Ca2+ and Mg2+. Using a homologous expression system, our study demonstrates for the first time that these 7 MH mutations are all both necessary and sufficient to induce MH-related phenotypes. Decreased sensitivity to Ca2+ and Mg2+ inhibition and inability of MHRyR1s to be fully inactivated at [Ca2+]i typical of normal myotubes at rest are key defects that contribute to the initiation of MH episodes.",0
"In vivo studies of phenylalanine hydroxylase by phenylalanine breath test: diagnosis of tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. || Adolescent Adult Biopterin Breath Tests Carbon Dioxide Carbon Isotopes Child Child, Preschool Female Genotype Humans Infant Male Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)-responsive phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency is characterized by reduction of blood phenylalanine level after a BH4-loading test. Most cases of BH4-responsive PAH deficiency include mild phenylketonuria (PKU) or mild hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA), but not all patients with mild PKU respond to BH4. We performed the phenylalanine breath test as reliable method to determine the BH4 responsiveness. Phenylalanine breath test quantitatively measures the conversion of L-[1-13C] phenylalanine to 13CO2 and is a noninvasive and rapid test. Twenty Japanese patients with HPA were examined with a dose of 10 mg/kg of 13C-phenylalanine with or without a dose of 10 mg . kg(-1) . d(-1) of BH4 for 3 d. The phenylalanine breath test [cumulative recovery rate (CRR)] could distinguish control subjects (15.4 +/- 1.5%); heterozygotes (10.3 +/- 1.0%); and mild HPA (2.74%), mild PKU (1.13 +/- 0.14%), and classical PKU patients (0.29 +/- 0.14%). The genotypes in mild PKU cases were compound heterozygotes with mild (L52S, R241C, R408Q) and severe mutations, whereas a mild HPA case was homozygote of R241C. CRR correlated inversely with pretreatment phenylalanine levels, indicating the gene dosage effects on PKU. BH4 loading increased CRR from 1.13 +/- 0.14 to 2.95 +/- 1.14% (2.6-fold) in mild PKU and from 2.74 to 7.22% (2.6-fold) in mild HPA. A CRR of 5 to 6% reflected maintenance of appropriate serum phenylalanine level. The phenylalanine breath test is useful for the diagnosis of BH4-responsive PAH deficiency and determination of the optimal dosage of BH4 without increasing blood phenylalanine level.",1 0
"Phenotypical characterization of α-galactosidase A gene mutations identified in a large Fabry disease screening program in stroke in the young. || Adult Belgium Echocardiography Electrocardiography Fabry Disease Female Genetic Testing Glycolipids Humans Male Mutation Phenotype Skin Sphingolipids Stroke Trihexosylceramides Vertebrobasilar Insufficiency Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || In the Belgian Fabry Study (BeFaS), the prevalence of Fabry disease was assessed in 1000 young patients presenting with stroke, unexplained white matter lesions or vertebrobasilar dolichoectasia. The results of the BeFaS suggested that Fabry disease may play a role in up to 1% of young patients presenting with cerebrovascular disease. However, the clinical relevance was unclear in all cases. We report on detailed phenotyping in subjects identified with α-galactosidase A (α-Gal A) enzyme deficiency or GLA mutations identified in the BeFaS (n=10), and on the results of family screening in this population. Family screening was performed to identify additional mutation carriers. Biochemical and/or clinical evaluation of all subjects (BeFaS index patients and relatives carrying a GLA mutation) was performed. Genetic family screening revealed 18 additional GLA mutation carriers. Bloodspot α-Gal A enzyme activity was normal in all GLA mutation carriers, even in 2 males with the p.A143T mutation. Plasma Gb3 and lyso-Gb3 levels were normal in all subjects. Elevated Gb3 in urine was detected in 2 subjects. Some classic clinical signs of Fabry disease, like angiokeratoma or cornea verticillata, could not be detected in our population. Cardiac symptoms of Fabry disease were found in 6 out of 10 p.A143T carriers. No signs of cerebrovascular disease were found in the relatives with a GLA mutation. We could not identify mutations causing the classical clinical phenotype of Fabry disease in our cerebrovascular disease population. Enzyme activity analysis in bloodspots and plasma may fail to identify late-onset variants of Fabry disease. We recommend genetic testing when an atypical, late-onset variant of Fabry disease is suspected in a male cerebrovascular disease patient. However, this may lead to the identification of non-disease causing or controversial genetic variants.",2 0 3
"Counteracting effects operating on Src homology 2 domain-containing protein-tyrosine phosphatase 2 (SHP2) function drive selection of the recurrent Y62D and Y63C substitutions in Noonan syndrome. || Amino Acid Sequence Humans Models, Molecular Molecular Dynamics Simulation Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Noonan Syndrome Phosphorylation Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 src Homology Domains || Activating mutations in PTPN11 cause Noonan syndrome, the most common nonchromosomal disorder affecting development and growth. PTPN11 encodes SHP2, an Src homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing protein-tyrosine phosphatase that positively modulates RAS function. Here, we characterized functionally all possible amino acid substitutions arising from single-base changes affecting codons 62 and 63 to explore the molecular mechanisms lying behind the largely invariant occurrence of the Y62D and Y63C substitutions recurring in Noonan syndrome. We provide structural and biochemical data indicating that the autoinhibitory interaction between the N-SH2 and protein-tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) domains is perturbed in both mutants as a result of an extensive structural rearrangement of the N-SH2 domain. Most mutations affecting Tyr(63) exerted an unpredicted disrupting effect on the structure of the N-SH2 phosphopeptide-binding cleft mediating the interaction of SHP2 with signaling partners. Among all the amino acid changes affecting that codon, the disease-causing mutation was the only substitution that perturbed the stability of the inactive conformation of SHP2 without severely impairing proper phosphopeptide binding of N-SH2. On the other hand, the disruptive effect of the Y62D change on the autoinhibited conformation of the protein was balanced, in part, by less efficient binding properties of the mutant. Overall, our data demonstrate that the selection-by-function mechanism acting as driving force for PTPN11 mutations affecting codons 62 and 63 implies balancing of counteracting effects operating on the allosteric control of the function of SHP2.",0
"L-alanine supplementation in late infantile glycogen storage disease type II. || Administration, Oral Alanine Cardiomyopathies Dietary Supplements Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Muscle Hypotonia Myotonic Disorders Treatment Outcome || We report a male with late infantile glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe's disease) who presented at 12 months of age with muscular hypotonia and developmental delay. Oral supplementation with L-alanine has been administered for 5 years. Progression of skeletal myopathy was slow, and cardiomyopathy resolved almost completely. L-alanine may be a valuable supplement for infants with glycogen storage disease type II.",3 1 0
"Germline mutations of MEK in cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome are sensitive to MEK and RAF inhibition: implications for therapeutic options. || Animals Binding Sites COS Cells Cell Line Cercopithecus aethiops Craniofacial Abnormalities Germ-Line Mutation Heart Defects, Congenital Humans Imidazoles MAP Kinase Kinase 1 MAP Kinase Kinase 2 MAP Kinase Signaling System Phosphorylation Protein Kinase Inhibitors Rats Recombinant Proteins Skin Abnormalities Syndrome raf Kinases || Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome is a sporadic developmental disorder characterized by distinctive craniofacial features, heart defects, mental retardation and ectodermal abnormalities. We recently reported missense germline mutations in the genes MEK1 and MEK2 in patients with CFC. These mutations, including F53S and Y130C MEK1, and F57C MEK2, are the first naturally occurring mutations to be identified in these genes. This study reports data concerning the biochemical functions of the novel mutants, as well as the roles of these MEK genes in the MAPK signaling cascade. Our CFC MEK variants cannot induce ERK unless they are phosphorylated by RAF at two key serine residues in the regulatory loop. When we replaced the serine residues with alanines, ERK phosphorylation was significantly reduced in the presence of RAF. We did find that F57C MEK2 activation was less dependent on RAF signaling than the other mutants. This difference results in F57C MEK2 being resistant to the selective RAF inhibitor SB-590885. All three mutants are sensitive to the MEK inhibitor U0126. The majority of CFC cases result from mutations in B-RAF. A recent report indicates the possibility that cancer cells with activated B-RAF have enhanced, selective sensitivity to MEK inhibitors. Thus, regardless of mutations identified in an individual with CFC, MEK inhibition is a potential therapeutic approach for this population.",0
"A functional dissection of PTEN N-terminus: implications in PTEN subcellular targeting and tumor suppressor activity. || Animals COS Cells Cell Membrane Cell Nucleus Cell Proliferation Cercopithecus aethiops Cytoplasm Humans Mutation Neoplasms Nuclear Localization Signals PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt Saccharomyces cerevisiae || Spatial regulation of the tumor suppressor PTEN is exerted through alternative plasma membrane, cytoplasmic, and nuclear subcellular locations. The N-terminal region of PTEN is important for the control of PTEN subcellular localization and function. It contains both an active nuclear localization signal (NLS) and an overlapping PIP2-binding motif (PBM) involved in plasma membrane targeting. We report a comprehensive mutational and functional analysis of the PTEN N-terminus, including a panel of tumor-related mutations at this region. Nuclear/cytoplasmic partitioning in mammalian cells and PIP3 phosphatase assays in reconstituted S. cerevisiae defined categories of PTEN N-terminal mutations with distinct PIP3 phosphatase and nuclear accumulation properties. Noticeably, most tumor-related mutations that lost PIP3 phosphatase activity also displayed impaired nuclear localization. Cell proliferation and soft-agar colony formation analysis in mammalian cells of mutations with distinctive nuclear accumulation and catalytic activity patterns suggested a contribution of both properties to PTEN tumor suppressor activity. Our functional dissection of the PTEN N-terminus provides the basis for a systematic analysis of tumor-related and experimentally engineered PTEN mutations.",0
"A comprehensive study of TP53 mutations in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: Analysis of 1287 diagnostic and 1148 follow-up CLL samples. || Alternative Splicing Biomarkers, Tumor Blotting, Western Chromosome Deletion Female Follow-Up Studies Gene Expression Profiling Humans Leukemia, Lymphocytic, Chronic, B-Cell Male Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Prognosis RNA, Messenger Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || TP53 plays a pivotal role in the process of DNA repair and apoptosis. In 10-20% of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), the TP53 pathway is affected. In this study, we analyzed the TP53 mutation status in 2435 consecutive CLL samples, including 1287 diagnostic samples and 1148 samples during follow-up, using FASAY (Functional Analysis of Separated Alleles in Yeast) and direct sequencing. In a cohort of 1287 diagnostic CLL samples, we identified 237 cases with TP53 variants, including mutations, temperature-sensitive variants, deletions, insertions and aberrant splicing variants (18.4%). In 1148 follow-up samples, no TP53 clonal evolution was observed.",0
"Diagnostic dilemmas in Fabry disease: a case series study on GLA mutations of unknown clinical significance. || Adolescent Adult Aged Biopsy Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Fabry Disease Female Globosides Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Retrospective Studies Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease' (FD) phenotype is heterogeneous: alpha-galactosidase A gene mutations (GLA) can lead to classical or non-classical FD, or no FD. The aim of this study is to describe pitfalls in diagnosing non-classical FD and assess the diagnostic value of plasma globotriaosylsphingosine. This is a case series study. Family 1 (p.A143T) presented with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), absent classical FD signs, high residual alpha-galactosidase A activity (AGAL-A) and normal plasma globotriaosylsphingosine. Co-segregating sarcomeric mutations were found. Cardiac biopsy excluded FD. In family 2 (p.P60L), FD was suspected after kidney biopsy in a female with chloroquine use. Males had residual AGAL-A, no classical FD signs and minimally increased plasma globotriaosylsphingosine, indicating that p.P60L is most likely non-pathogenic. Non-specific complications and histology can be explained by chloroquine and alternative causes. Males of two unrelated families (p.R112H) show AGAL-A <5%, but slightly elevated plasma globotriaosylsphingosine (1.2-2.0 classical males >50 nmol/l). Histological evidence suggests a variable penetrance of this mutation. Patients with GLA mutations and non-specific findings such as HCM may have non-classical FD or no FD. Other (genetic) causes of FD-like findings should be excluded, including medication inducing FD-like storage. Plasma globotriaosylsphingosine may serve as a diagnostic tool, but histology of an affected organ is often mandatory.",2 4 0 3
"Functional consequences of novel connexin 26 mutations associated with hereditary hearing loss. || Connexin 26 Connexins Gap Junctions HeLa Cells Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Immunohistochemistry Mutation || In a study of 530 individuals with non-syndromic, sensorineural hearing loss, we identified 18 mutations at connexin 26 (Cx26), four of which are novel (-23G>T, I33T, 377_383dupTCCGCAT, W172R) and the remaining 14 (ivs1+1G>A, M1V, 35delG, W24X, I35S, V37I, R75W, W77X, 312del14, E120del, Q124X, Y136X, R143W, R184P) being mutations previously described. To gain insight into functional consequences of these mutations, cellular localization of the mutant proteins and their ability to permit lucifer yellow transfer between cells was studied in seven of them (W24X, I33T, I35S, R75W, E120del, W172R and R184P). I35S and R184P showed impaired trafficking of the protein to the plasma membrane. I33T, R75W, E120del and W172R showed predominantly membrane localization but did not form functional gap junction channels. Surprisingly, W24X, a protein-truncating mutation, apparently permits formation of a full-length protein, perhaps due to a stop codon read-through mechanism. These results provide further evidence that Cx26 mutations affect gap junction activity by mis-regulation at multiple levels.",1 0
"Telomerase expression is sufficient for chromosomal integrity in cells lacking p53 dependent G1 checkpoint function. ||  || Secondary cultures of human fibroblasts display a finite lifespan ending at senescence. Loss of p53 function by mutation or viral oncogene expression bypasses senescence, allowing cell division to continue for an additional 10-20 doublings. During this time chromosomal aberrations seen in mitotic cells increase while DNA damage and decatenation checkpoint functions in G2 cells decrease. To explore this complex interplay between chromosomal instability and checkpoint dysfunction, human fibroblast lines were derived that expressed HPV16E6 oncoprotein or dominant-negative alleles of p53 (A143V and H179Q) with or without the catalytic subunit of telomerase. Cells with normal p53 function displayed 86-93% G1 arrest after exposure to 1.5 Gy ionizing radiation (IR). Expression of HPV16E6 or p53-H179Q severely attenuated G1 checkpoint function (3-20% arrest) while p53-A143V expression induced intermediate attenuation (55-57% arrest) irrespective of telomerase expression. All cell lines, regardless of telomerase expression or p53 status, exhibited a normal DNA damage G2 checkpoint response following exposure to 1.5 Gy IR prior to the senescence checkpoint. As telomerase-negative cells bypassed senescence, the frequencies of chromosomal aberrations increased generally congruent with attenuation of G2 checkpoint function. Telomerase expression allowed cells with defective p53 function to grow >175 doublings without chromosomal aberrations or attenuation of G2 checkpoint function. Thus, chromosomal instability in cells with defective p53 function appears to depend upon telomere erosion not loss of the DNA damage induced G1 checkpoint.",0
"Clinical spectrum of obesity and mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor gene. || Adolescent Age of Onset Amino Acid Sequence Body Composition Child Energy Metabolism Female Genotype Growth Humans Hyperinsulinism Hyperphagia Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Obesity Pedigree Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Corticotropin || Melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) deficiency is the commonest monogenic form of obesity. However, the clinical spectrum and mode of inheritance have not been defined, pathophysiological mechanisms leading to obesity are poorly understood, and there is little information regarding genotype-phenotype correlations. We determined the nucleotide sequence of the MC4R gene in 500 probands with severe childhood obesity. Family studies were undertaken to examine cosegregation of identified mutations with obesity. Subjects with MC4R deficiency underwent metabolic and endocrine evaluation; the results were correlated with the signaling properties of mutant receptors. Twenty-nine probands (5.8 percent) had mutations in MC4R; 23 were heterozygous, and 6 were homozygous. Mutation carriers had severe obesity, increased lean mass, increased linear growth, hyperphagia, and severe hyperinsulinemia; homozygotes were more severely affected than heterozygotes. Subjects with mutations retaining residual signaling capacity had a less severe phenotype. Mutations in MC4R result in a distinct obesity syndrome that is inherited in a codominant manner. Mutations leading to complete loss of function are associated with a more severe phenotype. The correlation between the signaling properties of these mutant receptors and energy intake emphasizes the key role of this receptor in the control of eating behavior in humans.",2 4 0
"Mutations of the PDS gene, encoding pendrin, are associated with protein mislocalization and loss of iodide efflux: implications for thyroid dysfunction in Pendred syndrome. || Biological Transport Carrier Proteins Cell Line Goiter HeLa Cells Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Iodides Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Thyroid Gland Tissue Distribution || Pendred syndrome (PDS) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by deafness and goiter. Phenotypic heterogeneity is observed in affected individuals, and thyroid dysfunction is particularly variable. The syndrome is caused by mutations in the PDS (SLC26A4) gene, encoding an anion transporter pendrin, which localizes to the apical membrane of thyroid follicular cells. PDS is thought to enable efflux iodide into the follicle lumen. More than 50 diseases causing mutations of PDS have been reported. Here we have investigated the effect of nine PDS missense mutations on pendrin localization and iodide transport with the view to understanding their functional impact. As demonstrated by transient expression of green fluorescent protein-tagged pendrin mutant constructs in mammalian cell lines, appropriate trafficking to the plasma membrane was observed for only two mutants. The remaining PDS mutants appear to be retained within the endoplasmic reticulum following transfection. Iodide efflux assays were performed using human embryonic kidney 293 cells transfected with mutant pendrin and cotransfected with sodium iodide transporter to provide a mechanism of iodide uptake. The results indicated loss of pendrin iodide transport for all mislocalizing mutations. However, PDS mutants are associated with variable thyroid dysfunction in affected subjects. We concluded that additional genetic and/or environmental factors influence the thyroid activity in Pendred syndrome.",0
"Functional and Clinical Consequences of Novel α-Galactosidase A Mutations in Fabry Disease. || Adolescent Adult Amino Acid Substitution Cell Line Child Child, Preschool Databases, Genetic Enzyme Activation Fabry Disease Female Gene Expression Genetic Association Studies Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is a rare metabolic disorder of glycosphingolipid storage caused by mutations in the GLA gene encoding lysosomal hydrolase α-galactosidase A (α-gal A). Recently, the diagnostic procedure for FD has advanced in several ways, through the development of a specific biomarker (lyso-Gb3) and the implementation of newborn screenings, which acted as a catalyst to augment general awareness of the disease. Heterologous over-expression of α-gal A variants and subsequent in vitro measurement of enzyme activity provided molecular data to elucidate the relationship between mutation, enzyme damage, lyso-Gb3 biomarker levels, and clinical phenotype. This knowledge is the foundation for improved counseling with regard to prognosis and therapeutic decisions. Herein, we resume the approach of in vitro characterization, with a further 73 mainly novel GLA gene mutations. Patient lyso-Gb3 data were available for most of the mutations. All mutations were tested for responsiveness to pharmacological chaperone treatment and phenotypic data for 61 hemizygous male and 116 heterozygous female patients carrying a mutation associated with ≥ 20% residual activity, formerly classified as ""mild"" variant, were collected in order to evaluate the pathogenicity. We conclude that a mild GLA variant is typically characterized by high residual enzyme activity and normal biomarker levels. We found evidence that these variants can still be classified as a distinctive, but milder, sub-type of FD.",3 4 0
"Phenylketonuria: genotype-phenotype correlations based on expression analysis of structural and functional mutations in PAH. ||  || When analyzed in the context of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) three-dimensional structure, only a minority of the PKU mutations described world-wide affect catalytic residues. Consistent with these observations, recent data point to defective folding and subsequent aggregation/degradation as a predominant disease mechanism for several mutations. In this work, we use a combined approach of expression in eukaryotic cells at different temperatures and a prokaryotic system with co-expression of chaperonins to elucidate and confirm structural consequences for 18 PKU mutations. Three mutations are located in the amino terminal regulatory domain and 15 in the catalytic domain. Four mutations were found to abolish the specific activity in all conditions. Two are catalytic mutations (Y277D and E280K) and two are severe structural defects (IVS10-11G>A and L311P). All the remaining mutations (D59Y, I65T, E76G, P122Q, R158Q, G218V, R243Q, P244L, R252W, R261Q, A309V, R408Q, R408W, and Y414C) are folding defects causing reduced stability and accelerated degradation, although some of them probably affect residues involved in regulation. In these cases, we have demonstrated that the amount of mutant PAH protein and residual activity could be modulated by in vitro experimental conditions, and therefore the observed in vivo metabolic variation may be explained by interindividual variation in the quality control systems. The results derived provide an experimental framework to define the mutation severity relating genotype to phenotype. They also explain the observed inconsistencies for some mutations in patients with similar genotype and different phenotypes.",0
"Polymorphisms in promoter sequences of the p15 ( INK4B ) and PTEN genes of normal Japanese individuals. || Base Sequence Cell Line, Transformed Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p15 DNA Gene Expression Regulation Genes, Reporter Humans Japan Luciferases Molecular Sequence Data Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Polymorphism, Genetic Promoter Regions, Genetic Transcription Factors || Gene promoter regions of p15(INK4B), a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, and phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), a dual-function protein and lipid phosphatase, interact with regulatory factors for gene transcription and methylation. Normal individuals exhibit sequence polymorphisms in these regulatory genes. We isolated genomic DNA from whole blood of healthy Japanese individuals and sequenced promoter regions of the p15 ( INK4B ) and PTEN genes. We also examined the influence of polymorphisms on promoter activity in several cell lines. We identified polymorphisms at positions -699, -394, and -242 and an insertion at position -320 in the p15 ( INK4B ) gene and a polymorphism at position -1142 in the PTEN gene. Reporter gene analysis revealed that these polymorphisms influenced transcriptional regulation in their cell lines. Our results indicate for the first time that promoter sequences of the p15 ( INK4B ) and PTEN genes differ among normal Japanese individuals and that promoter polymorphisms can influence gene transcription.",0
"Functional analysis of the p.(Leu15Pro) and p.(Gly20Arg) sequence changes in the signal sequence of LDL receptor. || Animals Arginine CHO Cells Cricetinae Cricetulus Endoplasmic Reticulum Glycine Heterozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Leucine Microscopy, Confocal Mutation Pedigree Proline Protein Folding Protein Sorting Signals Protein Structure, Secondary Receptors, LDL || The low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) is a transmembrane protein that plays a key role in cholesterol metabolism. It contains 860 amino acids including a 21 amino acid long signal sequence, which directs the protein into the endoplasmic reticulum. Mutations in the LDLR gene lead to cholesterol accumulation in the plasma and results in familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). Knowledge of the impact of a mutation on the LDLR protein structure and function is very important for the diagnosis and management of FH. Unfortunately, for a large proportion of mutations this information is still missing. In this study, we focused on the LDLR signal sequence and carried out functional and in silico analyses of two sequence changes, p.(Gly20Arg) and p.(Leu15Pro), localized in this part of the LDLR. Our results revealed that the p.(Gly20Arg) change, previously described as disease causing, has no detrimental effect on protein expression or LDL particle binding. In silico analysis supports this observation, showing that both the wt and p.(Gly20Arg) signal sequences adopt an expected α-helix structure. In contrast, the mutation p.(Leu15Pro) is not associated with functional protein expression and exhibits a structure with disrupted a α-helical arrangement in the signal sequence, which most likely affects protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum.",0
"The conservative substitution Asp-645-->Glu in lysosomal alpha-glucosidase affects transport and phosphorylation of the enzyme in an adult patient with glycogen-storage disease type II. || Adult African Continental Ancestry Group Alleles Aspartic Acid Base Sequence Biological Transport Cells, Cultured Codon DNA Mutational Analysis Glutamates Glutamic Acid Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Lysosomes Microscopy, Immunoelectron Molecular Sequence Data Phenotype Phosphorylation Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic Protein Processing, Post-Translational Regulatory Sequences, Nucleic Acid Sequence Analysis, DNA Tunicamycin alpha-Glucosidases beta-N-Acetylhexosaminidases || Glycogen-storage disease type II (GSDII) is caused by the deficiency of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (acid maltase). This paper reports on the analysis of the mutant alleles in an American black patient with an adult form of GSDII (GM1935). The lysosomal alpha-glucosidase precursor of this patient has abnormal molecular features: (i) the molecular mass is decreased, (ii) the phosphorylation is deficient and (iii) the proteolytic processing is impaired. Sequence analysis revealed four mutations leading to amino acid alterations: Asp-645-->Glu, Val-816-->Ile, Arg-854-->Stop and Thr-927-->Ile. By using allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization on PCR-amplified cDNA we have demonstrated that the Arg-854-->Stop mutation is located in one allele that is not expressed, and that the other allele contains the remaining three mutations. Each of the mutations was introduced in wild-type cDNA and expressed in COS cells to analyse the effect on biosynthesis, transport and phosphorylation of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase. The Val-816-->Ile substitution appeared to have no significant effect in contrast with results [Martiniuk, Mehler, Bodkin, Tzall, Hirshhorn, Zhong and Hirschhorn (1991) DNA Cell Biol. 10, 681-687] and was therefore defined as a polymorphism. The Thr-927-->Ile substitution deleting one of the seven glycosylation sites was found to be responsible for the decrease in molecular-mass, but not for the deficient proteolytic processing and phosphorylation. It did not cause the enzyme deficiency either. The third mutation leading to the Asp-645-->Glu substitution was proven to account in full for the observed defects in transport, phosphorylation and proteolytic processing of the newly synthesized alpha-glucosidase precursor of the patient.",1 0
"Functionally distinct groups of inherited PTEN mutations in autism and tumour syndromes. || Autistic Disorder Biocatalysis Cells, Cultured Genetic Predisposition to Disease Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Inheritance Patterns Mutation, Missense Neurons PTEN Phosphohydrolase Protein Stability || Germline mutations in the phosphatase PTEN are associated with diverse human pathologies, including tumour susceptibility, developmental abnormalities and autism, but any genotype-phenotype relationships are poorly understood. We have studied the functional consequences of seven PTEN mutations identified in patients diagnosed with autism and macrocephaly and five mutations from severe tumour bearing sufferers of PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome (PHTS). All seven autism-associated PTEN mutants investigated retained the ability to suppress cellular AKT signalling, although five were highly unstable. Observed effects on AKT also correlated with the ability to suppress soma size and the length and density of dendritic spines in primary neurons. Conversely, all five PTEN mutations from severe cases of PHTS appeared to directly and strongly disrupt the ability to inhibit AKT signalling. Our work implies that alleles causing incomplete loss of PTEN function are more commonly linked to autism than to severe PHTS cases.",0
"Anatomy of a homeoprotein revealed by the analysis of human MODY3 mutations. || Amino Acid Substitution DNA-Binding Proteins Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Dimerization Hemeproteins Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta Humans Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Nuclear Proteins Recombinant Proteins Transcription Factors Transcriptional Activation || Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) is an atypical dimeric homeodomain-containing protein that is expressed in liver, intestine, stomach, kidney, and pancreas. Mutations in the HNF1alpha gene are associated with an autosomal dominant form of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus called maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3). More than 80 different mutations have been identified so far, many of which involve highly conserved amino acid residues among vertebrate HNF1alpha. In the present work, we investigated the molecular mechanisms by which MODY3 mutations could affect HNF1alpha function. For this purpose, we analyzed the properties of 10 mutants resulting in amino acid substitutions or protein truncation. Some mutants have a reduced protein stability, whereas others are either defective in the DNA binding or impaired in their intrinsic trans-activation potential. Three mutants, characterized by a complete loss of trans-activation, behave as dominant negatives when transfected with the wild-type protein. These data define a clear causative relationship between MODY3 mutations and functional defects in HNF1alpha trans-activation. In addition, our analysis sheds new light on the structure of a homeoprotein playing a key role in pancreatic beta cell function.",0
"Germline mutations in the PALB2 gene are population specific and occur with low frequencies in familial breast cancer. ||  || The Partner and Localizer of BRCA2 (PALB2) protein has been linked to Fanconi anemia and breast cancer predisposition. Here we present data of a comprehensive mutation screening of the PALB2 gene in 818 familial cases of breast cancer from Germany. By analyzing the entire coding region of PALB2, we found seven truncating mutations (six of them novel) in families tested negative for BRCA1/2-mutations. In addition, two novel potentially disease causing missense mutations were found. Remarkably, only one mutation reported previously in other populations, was also identified in the German population. No PALB2 mutation carriers were identified in 450 unaffected controls. Thus, our observations indicate a low prevalence of deleterious PALB2 mutations and a specific mutation profile within the German population. As PALB2-deficient tumors were shown to be sensitive to Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase (PARP) inhibitors, our study has implications for newly developed, favorable treatment options in familial breast cancer.",0
"The intracellular E-cadherin germline mutation V832 M lacks the ability to mediate cell-cell adhesion and to suppress invasion. || Animals CHO Cells Cadherins Cell Adhesion Cricetinae Cytoskeletal Proteins DNA-Binding Proteins Germ-Line Mutation Lymphoid Enhancer-Binding Factor 1 Proto-Oncogene Proteins Trans-Activators Transcription Factors Wnt Proteins Zebrafish Proteins beta Catenin || E-cadherin germline missense mutations have been shown to be responsible for significant loss of protein activity. A new cytoplasmic E-cadherin germline missense mutation (V832 M) was recently identified in a hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) Japanese family. This E-cadherin mutant was cloned in a Chinese hamster ovary cell model system and functionally characterized, in terms of aggregation and invasion. Cells expressing the germline V832M mutant fail to aggregate and invade into collagen, supporting the pathogenic role of this germline missense mutation in gastric cancer. We also tested the ability of this mutation to activate the TCF-LEF trascriptional activity, in comparison with three other E-cadherin missense mutations (T340A, A634V and A617T), associated to loss of E-cadherin function. All the E-cadherin mutants reduced TCF-LEF activation to a similar extent as the wild-type protein, suggesting that the oncogenic effect of the E-cadherin mutants is unlikely to be transmitted through a beta-catenin-dependent activation of the WNT pathway.",0
"Functional and biological studies of α-galactosidase A variants with uncertain significance from newborn screening in Taiwan. || Biological Assay Biomarkers Blood Specimen Collection Dried Blood Spot Testing Fabry Disease Female Humans Infant, Newborn Male Mutation Neonatal Screening Taiwan alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is an X-linked disorder resulted from deficiency of α-galactosidase A (GLA) activity. In Taiwan, a total of 792,247 newborns were screened from 2008 to 2014 in two newborn screening centers, and 13 variants of uncertain significance (VOUS) in the GLA gene were identified. To determine whether these variants were pathogenic or not, functional, biochemical, clinical and pedigree analyses were performed. In vitro functional assay was established through site-directed mutagenesis, and four in silico tools were used to predict pathogenesis. The enzyme activity of dried blood spots and plasma metabolite lyso-Gb3 level from subjects with the variants were measured. Additionally, clinical manifestations were evaluated extensively from the subjects and their relatives. Our results revealed that p.G104V, p.I232T, p.D322H, and p.G360C all exhibited relatively low residual enzyme activities and elevated plasma lyso-Gb3 level. These data strongly suggest that these Fabry mutations may cause classical or later-onset phenotypes. In contrast, neither significantly clinical symptoms nor elevated lyso-Gb3 level was found in cases with p.P60S, p.A108T, p.S304T, p.R356Q, and p.P362T variants, which may be non-pathogenic or milder forms of Fabry variants. More data need to be included for the patients with p.N53D, p.P210S, p.M296L, and p.K391T variants. The established system provides us more information to classify these GLA variants.",2 4 0
"The prevalent deep intronic c. 639+919 G>A GLA mutation causes pseudoexon activation and Fabry disease by abolishing the binding of hnRNPA1 and hnRNP A2/B1 to a splicing silencer. || Exons Fabry Disease HeLa Cells Heterogeneous Nuclear Ribonucleoprotein A1 Heterogeneous-Nuclear Ribonucleoprotein Group A-B Humans Introns Mutation RNA Splice Sites RNA Splicing RNA, Messenger Silencer Elements, Transcriptional alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is an X-linked recessive inborn disorder of the glycosphingolipid metabolism, caused by total or partial deficiency of the lysosomal α-galactosidase A enzyme due to mutations in the GLA gene. The prevalent c.639+919 G>A mutation in GLA leads to pathogenic insertion of a 57bp pseudoexon sequence from intron 4, which is responsible for the cardiac variant phenotype. In this study we investigate the splicing regulatory mechanism leading to GLA pseudoexon activation. Splicing analysis of GLA minigenes revealed that pseudoexon activation is influenced by cell-type. We demonstrate that the wild-type sequence harbors an hnRNP A1 and hnRNP A2/B1-binding exonic splicing silencer (ESS) overlapping the 5'splice site (5'ss) that prevents pseudoexon inclusion. The c.639+919 G>A mutation disrupts this ESS allowing U1 snRNP recognition of the 5'ss. We show that the wild-type GLA 5'ss motif with the ESS is also able to inhibit inclusion of an unrelated pseudoexon in the FGB gene, and that also in the FGB context inactivation of the ESS by the c.639+919 G>A mutation causes pseudoexon activation, underscoring the universal nature of the ESS. Finally, we demonstrate that splice switching oligonucleotide (SSO) mediated blocking of the pseudoexon 3'ss and 5'ss effectively restores normal GLA splicing. This indicates that SSO based splicing correction may be a therapeutic alternative in the treatment of Fabry disease.",0
"Poor cell surface expression of human melanocortin-4 receptor mutations associated with obesity. || Amino Acid Substitution Animals Base Sequence Body Weight Codon, Nonsense DNA Primers Frameshift Mutation Gene Expression Regulation Humans Mutation Mutation, Missense Obesity Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Corticotropin || The melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) plays an important role in the regulation of body weight in rodents. Mutations in the coding region of the MC4R are found more frequently in obese individuals, supporting the hypothesis that also in humans deficient melanocortin signaling may lead to obesity. Family studies that were carried out to demonstrate the relevance of single mutations for obesity were mostly inconclusive, most likely due to small sample size and complexity of the trait. In addition, the existing pharmacological data of the mutant receptors are limited in that for most mutations the effect on receptor expression level and Agouti-related protein (AgRP) pharmacology have not been studied. The aim of the present study was to gain further insight into the impact of the MC4R mutations on receptor function. Eleven missense mutations were tested for cell surface expression, affinity for alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH) and AgRP-(83-132), and the biological response to alpha-MSH. All mutants were poorly expressed at the cell surface, as measured by 125I-[Nle4-D-Phe7]alpha-MSH binding, and only a few mutants showed altered pharmacology for alpha-MSH and AgRP. Hemagglutinin-tagged mutant receptors were retained in the intracellular environment. These pharmacological data provide a basis to estimate the quantitative effect of MC4R mutations for the development of obesity.",0
"The hypertrophic cardiomyopathy myosin mutation R453C alters ATP binding and hydrolysis of human cardiac β-myosin. || Actins Adenosine Diphosphate Adenosine Triphosphate Amino Acid Substitution Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Crystallography, X-Ray Humans Hydrolysis Kinetics Models, Molecular Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Protein Binding Protein Structure, Secondary Protein Structure, Tertiary || The human hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mutation R453C results in one of the more severe forms of the myopathy. Arg-453 is found in a conserved surface loop of the upper 50-kDa domain of the myosin motor domain and lies between the nucleotide binding pocket and the actin binding site. It connects to the cardiomyopathy loop via a long α-helix, helix O, and to Switch-2 via the fifth strand of the central β-sheet. The mutation is, therefore, in a position to perturb a wide range of myosin molecular activities. We report here the first detailed biochemical kinetic analysis of the motor domain of the human β-cardiac myosin carrying the R453C mutation. A recent report of the same mutation (Sommese, R. F., Sung, J., Nag, S., Sutton, S., Deacon, J. C., Choe, E., Leinwand, L. A., Ruppel, K., and Spudich, J. A. (2013) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 12607-12612) found reduced ATPase and in vitro motility but increased force production using an optical trap. Surprisingly, our results show that the mutation alters few biochemical kinetic parameters significantly. The exceptions are the rate constants for ATP binding to the motor domain (reduced by 35%) and the ATP hydrolysis step/recovery stroke (slowed 3-fold), which could be the rate-limiting step for the ATPase cycle. Effects of the mutation on the recovery stroke are consistent with a perturbation of Switch-2 closure, which is required for the recovery stroke and the subsequent ATP hydrolysis.",0
"Identification of germline mutations in the cancer predisposing gene CDH1 in patients with orofacial clefts. || Animals Antigens, CD Brain CHO Cells Cadherins Child Child, Preschool Cleft Lip Cleft Palate Cricetinae Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation HeLa Cells Heterozygote Humans Male Neoplasms Pedigree Pregnancy Sequence Analysis, DNA Stomach Neoplasms || Orofacial clefts (OFC) are among the most common birth defects worldwide. The etiology of non-syndromic OFC is still largely unknown. During embryonic development, the cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin, encoded by CDH1, is highly expressed in the median edge epithelium of the palate. Furthermore, in multiple families with CDH1 mutations, OFC cases are observed. To determine whether CDH1 is a causative gene for non-syndromic OFC and to assess whether CDH1 mutation screening in non-syndromic OFC patients enables identification of families at risk of cancer, direct sequencing of the full coding sequence of CDH1 was performed in a cohort of 81 children with non-syndromic OFC. Eleven children had heterozygous CDH1 sequence variants, 5 cases with 4 distinct missense mutations and 8 cases with 4 intronic variants. Using a combination of in silico predictions and in vitro functional assays, three missense mutations in four non-syndromic OFC patients were predicted to be damaging to E-cadherin protein function. The intronic variants including one tested in an in vitro assay appeared to be benign, showing no influence on splicing. Functionally relevant heterozygous CDH1 missense mutations were found in 4 out of 81 (5%) patients with non-syndromic OFC. This finding opens a new pathway to reveal the molecular basis of non-syndromic OFC. Cancer risk among carriers of these mutations needs to be defined.",0
"The lipid phosphatase activity of PTEN is critical for its tumor supressor function. || Cell Line Escherichia coli Genes, Tumor Suppressor Germ-Line Mutation Humans PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Since their discovery, protein tyrosine phosphatases have been speculated to play a role in tumor suppression because of their ability to antagonize the growth-promoting protein tyrosine kinases. Recently, a tumor suppressor from human chromosome 10q23, called PTEN or MMAC1, has been identified that shares homology with the protein tyrosine phosphatase family. Germ-line mutations in PTEN give rise to several related neoplastic disorders, including Cowden disease. A key step in understanding the function of PTEN as a tumor suppressor is to identify its physiological substrates. Here we report that a missense mutation in PTEN, PTEN-G129E, which is observed in two Cowden disease kindreds, specifically ablates the ability of PTEN to recognize inositol phospholipids as a substrate, suggesting that loss of the lipid phosphatase activity is responsible for the etiology of the disease. Furthermore, expression of wild-type or substrate-trapping forms of PTEN in HEK293 cells altered the levels of the phospholipid products of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and ectopic expression of the phosphatase in PTEN-deficient tumor cell lines resulted in the inhibition of protein kinase (PK) B/Akt and regulation of cell survival.",0
"Identification and Functional Characterization of GAA Mutations in Colombian Patients Affected by Pompe Disease. ||  || Pompe disease (PD) is a recessive metabolic disorder characterized by acid α-glucosidase (GAA) deficiency, which results in lysosomal accumulation of glycogen in all tissues, especially in skeletal muscles. PD clinical course is mainly determined by the nature of the GAA mutations. Although ~400 distinct GAA sequence variations have been described, the genotype-phenotype correlation is not always evident.In this study, we describe the first clinical and genetic analysis of Colombian PD patients performed in 11 affected individuals. GAA open reading frame sequencing revealed eight distinct mutations related to PD etiology including two novel missense mutations, c.1106 T > C (p.Leu369Pro) and c.2236 T > C (p.Trp746Arg). In vitro functional studies showed that the structural changes conferred by both mutations did not inhibit the synthesis of the 110 kD GAA precursor form but affected the processing and intracellular transport of GAA. In addition, analysis of previously described variants located at this position (p.Trp746Gly, p.Trp746Cys, p.Trp746Ser, p.Trp746X) revealed new insights in the molecular basis of PD. Notably, we found that p.Trp746Cys mutation, which was previously described as a polymorphism as well as a causal mutation, displayed a mild deleterious effect. Interestingly and by chance, our study argues in favor of a remarkable Afro-American and European ancestry of the Colombian population. Taken together, our report provides valuable information on the PD genotype-phenotype correlation, which is expected to facilitate and improve genetic counseling of affected individuals and their families.",1 0
"Functional evaluation of PTEN missense mutations using in vitro phosphoinositide phosphatase assay. || Escherichia coli Genes, Tumor Suppressor Germ-Line Mutation Humans Inositol Phosphates Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation, Missense PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphatidylinositol Phosphates Phospholipids Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Point Mutation Protein Binding Tumor Suppressor Proteins || The tumor suppressor gene PTEN is frequently mutated in diverse human cancers and in autosomal dominant cancer predisposition disorders. Recent studies have shown that the lipid phosphatase activity of PTEN is critical for its tumor suppressor function and that PTEN negatively regulates the phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase-protein kinase B pathway. Although more than half of PTEN mutations result in protein truncation, a significant fraction of PTEN mutations are missense mutations. To examine whether tumor-derived and germ-line-derived missense mutations inactivate PTEN lipid phosphatase function, we constructed 42 distinct types of PTEN missense mutations and expressed them in Escherichia coli. The purified (His)6-tagged PTEN proteins were tested for their ability to dephosphorylate inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate and phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate. In addition, we examined the effect of mutant PTENs on the ability of PTEN to bind to the phospholipid membrane. The results revealed that the majority of PTEN missense mutations [38 of 42 (90%)] eliminated or reduced phosphatase activity and that all of the mutations examined had no effect on the membrane binding activity of PTEN. Our study indicated that phosphoinositide phosphatase activity is important for the tumor suppressor function of PTEN and that there may be other mechanisms of PTEN inactivation that are not monitored by in vitro phosphatase assay and in vitro membrane binding assay.",0
"Protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP2/PTPN11 mistargeting as a consequence of SH2-domain point mutations associated with Noonan Syndrome and leukemia. || Amino Acid Substitution HeLa Cells Humans Leukemia Mutation, Missense Neoplasm Proteins Noonan Syndrome Protein Binding Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 src Homology Domains || SHP2/PTPN11 is a key regulator of cytokine, growth factor and integrin signaling. SHP2 influences cell survival, proliferation and differentiation by regulating major signaling pathways. Mutations in PTPN11 cause severe diseases like Noonan, LEOPARD syndrome or leukemia. Whereas several of these mutations result in altered enzymatic activity due to impaired auto-inhibition, not all disease patterns can be explained by this mechanism. In this study we analyzed altered binding properties of disease-related SHP2-mutants bearing point mutations within the SH2-domain (T42A, E139D, and R138Q). Mutants were chosen according to SPR assays, which revealed different binding properties of mutated SH2 towards phosphorylated receptor peptides. To analyze global changes in mutant binding properties we applied quantitative mass spectrometry (SILAC). Using an in vitro approach we identified overall more than 1000 protein candidates, which specifically bind to the SH2-domain of SHP2. We discovered that mutations in the SH2-domain selectively affected protein enrichment by altering the binding capacity of the SH2-domain. Mutation-dependent, enhanced or reduced exposure of SHP2 to its binding partners could have an impact on the dynamics of signaling networks. Thus, disease-associated mutants of SHP2 should not only be discussed in the context of deregulated auto-inhibition but also with respect to deregulated protein targeting of the SHP2 mutants. Using quantitative mass spectrometry based proteomics we provided evidence that disease related mutations in SHP2 domains of SHP2 are able to influence SHP2 recruitment to its targets in mutation dependent manner. We discovered that mutations in the SH2-domain selectively affected protein enrichment ratios suggesting altered binding properties of the SH2-domain. We demonstrated that mutations within SHP2, which had been attributed to affect the enzymatic activity (i.e. affect the open/close status of SHP2), also differ in respect to binding properties. Our study indicates that SHP2 mutations need to be discussed not only in terms of deregulated auto-inhibition but also with respect to deregulated protein targeting properties of the SHP2 mutants. Discovery of the new binding partners for disease-related SHP2 mutants might provide a fruitful foundation for developing strategies targeting Noonan-associated leukemia.",0
"Altered-function p53 missense mutations identified in breast cancers can have subtle effects on transactivation. || Breast Neoplasms Carcinoma Female Galactose Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation, Missense Promoter Regions, Genetic Response Elements Transcription, Genetic Transcriptional Activation Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Mutations of the sequence-specific master regulator p53 that alter transactivation function from promoter response elements (RE) could result in changes in the strength of gene activation or spectra of genes regulated. Such mutations in this tumor suppressor might lead to dramatic phenotypic changes and diversification of cell responses to stress. We have determined ""functional fingerprints"" of sporadic breast cancer-related p53 mutants, many of which are also associated with familial cancer proneness such as the Li-Fraumeni syndrome and germline BRCA1/2 mutant-associated cancers. The ability of p53, wild-type and mutants, to transactivate from 11 human target REs has been assessed at variable expression levels using a cellular, isogenomic yeast model system that allows for the rapid analysis of p53 function using a qualitative and a quantitative reporter. Among 50 missense mutants, 29 were classified as loss of function. The remaining 21 retained transactivation toward at least one RE. At high levels of galactose-induced p53 expression, 12 of 21 mutants that retain transactivation seemed similar to wild-type. When the level of galactose was reduced, transactivation defects could be revealed, suggesting that some breast cancer-related mutants can have subtle changes in transcription. These findings have been compared with clinical data from an ongoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy treatment trial for locally advanced breast tumors. The functional and nonfunctional missense mutations may distinguish tumors in terms of demographics, appearance, and relapse, implying that heterogeneity in the functionality of specific p53 mutations could affect clinical behavior and outcome.",0
"Mutation profile of the GAA gene in 40 Italian patients with late onset glycogen storage disease type II. ||  || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII) is a recessively inherited disorder due to the deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) that results in impaired glycogen degradation and its accumulation in the lysosomes. We report here the complete molecular analysis of the GAA gene performed on 40 Italian patients with late onset GSDII. Twelve novel alleles have been identified: missense mutations were functionally characterized by enzyme activity and protein processing in a human GAA-deficient cell line while splicing mutations were studied by RT-PCR and in silico analysis. A complex allele was also identified carrying three different alterations in cis. The c.-32-13T > G was the most frequent mutation, present as compound heterozygote in 85% of the patients (allele frequency 42.3%), as described in other late onset GSDII Caucasian populations. Interestingly, the c.-32-13T > G was associated with the c.2237G > A (p.W746X) in nine of the 40 patients. Genotype-phenotype correlations are discussed with particular emphasis on the subgroup carrying the c.-32-13T > G/c.2237G > A genotype.",3 1 0
"Membrane association of the PTEN tumor suppressor: molecular details of the protein-membrane complex from SPR binding studies and neutron reflection. || Binding Sites Cell Membrane Humans Membrane Proteins Mutation Neutrons PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphatidylinositols Phosphatidylserines Protein Binding Structure-Activity Relationship Surface Plasmon Resonance || The structure and function of the PTEN phosphatase is investigated by studying its membrane affinity and localization on in-plane fluid, thermally disordered synthetic membrane models. The membrane association of the protein depends strongly on membrane composition, where phosphatidylserine (PS) and phosphatidylinositol diphosphate (PI(4,5)P(2)) act pronouncedly synergistic in pulling the enzyme to the membrane surface. The equilibrium dissociation constants for the binding of wild type (wt) PTEN to PS and PI(4,5)P(2) were determined to be K(d)∼12 µM and 0.4 µM, respectively, and K(d)∼50 nM if both lipids are present. Membrane affinities depend critically on membrane fluidity, which suggests multiple binding sites on the protein for PI(4,5)P(2). The PTEN mutations C124S and H93R show binding affinities that deviate strongly from those measured for the wt protein. Both mutants bind PS more strongly than wt PTEN. While C124S PTEN has at least the same affinity to PI(4,5)P(2) and an increased apparent affinity to PI(3,4,5)P(3), due to its lack of catalytic activity, H93R PTEN shows a decreased affinity to PI(4,5)P(2) and no synergy in its binding with PS and PI(4,5)P(2). Neutron reflection measurements show that the PTEN phosphatase ""scoots"" along the membrane surface (penetration <5 Å) but binds the membrane tightly with its two major domains, the C2 and phosphatase domains, as suggested by the crystal structure. The regulatory C-terminal tail is most likely displaced from the membrane and organized on the far side of the protein, ∼60 Å away from the bilayer surface, in a rather compact structure. The combination of binding studies and neutron reflection allows us to distinguish between PTEN mutant proteins and ultimately may identify the structural features required for membrane binding and activation of PTEN.",0
"PALB2, which encodes a BRCA2-interacting protein, is a breast cancer susceptibility gene. || Adult BRCA2 Protein Breast Neoplasms Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group N Protein Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Nuclear Proteins Pedigree Tumor Suppressor Proteins || PALB2 interacts with BRCA2, and biallelic mutations in PALB2 (also known as FANCN), similar to biallelic BRCA2 mutations, cause Fanconi anemia. We identified monoallelic truncating PALB2 mutations in 10/923 individuals with familial breast cancer compared with 0/1,084 controls (P = 0.0004) and show that such mutations confer a 2.3-fold higher risk of breast cancer (95% confidence interval (c.i.) = 1.4-3.9, P = 0.0025). The results show that PALB2 is a breast cancer susceptibility gene and further demonstrate the close relationship of the Fanconi anemia-DNA repair pathway and breast cancer predisposition.",0
"Novel mutations of the GLA gene in Japanese patients with Fabry disease and their functional characterization by active site specific chaperone. ||  || Fabry disease is an X-linked recessive inborn metabolic disorder caused by a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A (EC 3.2.1.22). The causative mutations are diverse, include both large rearrangements and single-base substitutions, and are dispersed throughout the 7 exons of the alpha-galactosidase A gene (GLA). Mutation hotspots for Fabry disease do not exist. We examined 62 Fabry patients in Japan and found 24 GLA mutations, including 11 novel ones. A potential treatment reported for Fabry disease is active site specific chaperone (ASSC) therapy using 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin (DGJ), an inhibitor of alpha-galactosidase A, at subinhibitory concentrations. We transfected COS-7 cells with the 24 mutant GLAs and analyzed the alpha-galactosidase A activities. We then treated the transfected COS-7 cells with DGJ and analyzed its effect on the mutant enzyme activities. The activity of 11 missense mutants increased significantly with DGJ. Although ASSC therapy is useful only for misfolding mutants and therefore not applicable to all cases, it may be useful for treating many Japanese patients with Fabry disease.",4 0
"Noonan syndrome-associated SHP2/PTPN11 mutants cause EGF-dependent prolonged GAB1 binding and sustained ERK2/MAPK1 activation. ||  || Noonan syndrome is a developmental disorder with dysmorphic facies, short stature, cardiac defects, and skeletal anomalies, which can be caused by missense PTPN11 mutations. PTPN11 encodes Src homology 2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase 2 (SHP2 or SHP-2), a protein tyrosine phosphatase that acts in signal transduction downstream to growth factor, hormone, and cytokine receptors. We compared the functional effects of three Noonan syndrome-causative PTPN11 mutations on SHP2's phosphatase activity, interaction with a binding partner, and signal transduction. All SHP2 mutants had significantly increased basal phosphatase activity compared to wild type, but that activity varied significantly between mutants and was further increased after epidermal growth factor stimulation. Cells expressing SHP2 mutants had prolonged extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 activation, which was ligand-dependent. Binding of SHP2 mutants to Grb2-associated binder-1 was increased and sustained, and tyrosine phosphorylation of both proteins was prolonged. Coexpression of Grb2-associated binder-1-FF, which lacks SHP2 binding motifs, blocked the epidermal growth factor-mediated increase in SHP2's phosphatase activity and resulted in a dramatic reduction of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 activation. Taken together, these results document that Noonan syndrome-associated PTPN11 mutations increase SHP2's basal phosphatase activity, with greater activation when residues directly involved in binding at the interface between the N-terminal Src homology 2 and protein tyrosine phosphatase domains are altered. The SHP2 mutants prolonged signal flux through the RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase (ERK2/MAPK1) pathway in a ligand-dependent manner that required docking through Grb2-associated binder-1 (GAB1), leading to increased cell proliferation.",0
"Molecular consequences of the R453C hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mutation on human β-cardiac myosin motor function. || Amino Acid Substitution Animals Cardiac Myosins Cardiomegaly Cell Movement Genetic Diseases, Inborn HEK293 Cells Humans Mice Mutation, Missense Myocardium Myosin Heavy Chains Myosin Light Chains Optical Tweezers || Cardiovascular disorders are the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the developed world, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is among the most frequently occurring inherited cardiac disorders. HCM is caused by mutations in the genes encoding the fundamental force-generating machinery of the cardiac muscle, including β-cardiac myosin. Here, we present a biomechanical analysis of the HCM-causing mutation, R453C, in the context of human β-cardiac myosin. We found that this mutation causes a ∼30% decrease in the maximum ATPase of the human β-cardiac subfragment 1, the motor domain of myosin, and a similar percent decrease in the in vitro velocity. The major change in the R453C human β-cardiac subfragment 1 is a 50% increase in the intrinsic force of the motor compared with wild type, with no appreciable change in the stroke size, as observed with a dual-beam optical trap. These results predict that the overall force of the ensemble of myosin molecules in the muscle should be higher in the R453C mutant compared with wild type. Loaded in vitro motility assay confirms that the net force in the ensemble is indeed increased. Overall, this study suggests that the R453C mutation should result in a hypercontractile state in the heart muscle.",0
"Delineation of the catalytic core of phenylalanine hydroxylase and identification of glutamate 286 as a critical residue for pterin function. || Amino Acid Sequence Animals Base Sequence Catalysis Circular Dichroism Cloning, Molecular DNA Primers Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel Escherichia coli Glutamates Glutamic Acid Kinetics Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Peptide Fragments Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Protein Structure, Secondary Pterins Rats Sequence Homology, Amino Acid || Rat phenylalanine hydroxylase was expressed in Escherichia coli. High level expression was achieved when the transformed E. coli were incubated at 27 degrees C for 24 h. A series of truncated fragments were expressed. The smallest fragment that gave an active soluble protein was from Leu142 to Phe410. This fragment corresponds closely to the region where there is highest homology between the three aromatic amino acid hydroxylases. The circular dichroism spectra of the phenylalanine hydroxylase catalytic core suggested that it contains around 50% alpha-helix. The core fragment is monomeric in dilute solutions but self-associates at higher concentrations. The E. coli expression system was used to generate a number of mutations in phenylalanine hydroxylase from position 264 to 290. This region had been previously shown to be important for pterin binding. Characterization of the mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase molecules identified Glu286 as an amino acid critical for pterin function in phenylalanine hydroxylase.",0
"In vitro expression analysis of R68G and R68S mutations in phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. || Adult Amino Acid Substitution Animals COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops Child Child, Preschool Female Genotype Humans Male Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation, Missense Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Recombinant Proteins || Phenylketonuria (PKU), an autosomal recessive disorder caused be a deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), is clinically very heterogeneous. At the molecular level, more than 400 mutations in the PAH gene are known to date, which in different genotype combinations could account for biochemical and clinical variability of symptoms. In vitro expression studies on R68G and R68S mutations causing mild phenylketonuria are presented.",0
"PALB2, CHEK2 and ATM rare variants and cancer risk: data from COGS. || Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins Breast Neoplasms Case-Control Studies Checkpoint Kinase 2 Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group N Protein Female Genetic Association Studies Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Mutation Nuclear Proteins Ovarian Neoplasms Prostatic Neoplasms Risk Tumor Suppressor Proteins || The rarity of mutations in PALB2, CHEK2 and ATM make it difficult to estimate precisely associated cancer risks. Population-based family studies have provided evidence that at least some of these mutations are associated with breast cancer risk as high as those associated with rare BRCA2 mutations. We aimed to estimate the relative risks associated with specific rare variants in PALB2, CHEK2 and ATM via a multicentre case-control study. We genotyped 10 rare mutations using the custom iCOGS array: PALB2 c.1592delT, c.2816T>G and c.3113G>A, CHEK2 c.349A>G, c.538C>T, c.715G>A, c.1036C>T, c.1312G>T, and c.1343T>G and ATM c.7271T>G. We assessed associations with breast cancer risk (42 671 cases and 42 164 controls), as well as prostate (22 301 cases and 22 320 controls) and ovarian (14 542 cases and 23 491 controls) cancer risk, for each variant. For European women, strong evidence of association with breast cancer risk was observed for PALB2 c.1592delT OR 3.44 (95% CI 1.39 to 8.52, p=7.1×10-5), PALB2 c.3113G>A OR 4.21 (95% CI 1.84 to 9.60, p=6.9×10-8) and ATM c.7271T>G OR 11.0 (95% CI 1.42 to 85.7, p=0.0012). We also found evidence of association with breast cancer risk for three variants in CHEK2, c.349A>G OR 2.26 (95% CI 1.29 to 3.95), c.1036C>T OR 5.06 (95% CI 1.09 to 23.5) and c.538C>T OR 1.33 (95% CI 1.05 to 1.67) (p≤0.017). Evidence for prostate cancer risk was observed for CHEK2 c.1343T>G OR 3.03 (95% CI 1.53 to 6.03, p=0.0006) for African men and CHEK2 c.1312G>T OR 2.21 (95% CI 1.06 to 4.63, p=0.030) for European men. No evidence of association with ovarian cancer was found for any of these variants. This report adds to accumulating evidence that at least some variants in these genes are associated with an increased risk of breast cancer that is clinically important.",0
"GT to AT transition at a splice donor site causes skipping of the preceding exon in phenylketonuria. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Composition Chromosome Deletion Cloning, Molecular DNA Exons Genes Humans Introns Liver Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Plasmids RNA Splicing RNA, Messenger || Classical Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive human genetic disorder caused by a deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). We isolated several mutant PAH cDNA clones from a PKU carrier individual and showed that they contained an internal 116 base pair deletion, corresponding precisely to exon 12 of the human chromosomal PAH gene. The deletion causes the synthesis of a truncated protein lacking the C-terminal 52 amino acids. Gene transfer and expression studies using the mutant PAH cDNA indicated that the deletion abolishes PAH activity in the cell as a result of protein instability. To determine the molecular basis of the deletion, the mutant chromosomal PAH gene was isolated from this individual and shown to contain a GT-- greater than AT substitution at the 5' splice donor site of intron 12. Thus, the consequence of the splice donor site mutation in the human liver is the skipping of the preceding exon during RNA splicing.",0
"Obesity-associated mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor provide novel insights into its function. || Animals Humans Mutagenesis Obesity Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Structure-Activity Relationship || Mutations in the Melanocortin 4 receptor are implicated in 1-6% of early onset or severe adult obesity cases. Most of the patients carry heterozygous missense mutations. Arguments for the pathogenicity of these mutations are based on the frequency of rare functionally relevant non-synonymous mutations in severely obese children and adults versus non-obese controls, the segregation of mutations with obesity in the family of the probands (although with incomplete penetrance) and the relevant functional defects described for these mutations. We have developed new assays to study the functional characteristics of these obesity-associated MC4R mutations. Systematic and comparative functional study of over 50 different obesity-associated mutations suggests that multiple functional alterations contribute to their pathogenicity. These studies also lead to new insights into the structure-function relationship of MC4R, provide novel hypotheses for the genetic predisposition to common obesity in humans and allow the development of new molecular tools for studying the physiological role of GPCRs.",0
"Modulation the alternative splicing of GLA (IVS4+919G>A) in Fabry disease. || Alternative Splicing Amiloride Exons Fabry Disease Histones Humans Introns RNA, Messenger alpha-Galactosidase || While a base substitution in intron 4 of GLA (IVS4+919G>A) that causes aberrant alternative splicing resulting in Fabry disease has been reported, its molecular mechanism remains unclear. Here we reported that upon IVS4+919G>A transversion, H3K36me3 was enriched across the alternatively spliced region. PSIP1, an adapter of H3K36me3, together with Hsp70 and NONO were recruited and formed a complex with SF2/ASF and SRp20, which further promoted GLA splicing. Amiloride, a splicing regulator in cancer cells, could reverse aberrant histone modification patterns and disrupt the association of splicing complex with GLA. It could also reverse aberrant GLA splicing in a PP1-dependant manner. Our findings revealed the alternative splicing mechanism of GLA (IVS4+919G>A), and a potential treatment for this specific genetic type of Fabry disease by amiloride in the future.",0
"Molecular study on the infantile form of Pompe disease in Chinese in Taiwan. || Alleles Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Consanguinity DNA Mutational Analysis Ethnic Groups Female Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Lysosomes Male Molecular Sequence Data Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Taiwan alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen-storage disease type II, Pompe disease, is caused by the deficiency of acid alpha-D-glucosidase in lysosome. Previously we found that acid alpha-D-glucosidase did exist in the skin fibroblasts and there was also no difference of mRNA in quantity and size of Chinese infantile type Pompe disease patients in Taiwan. However, functional assay of the acid alpha-D-glucosidase of these patients showed its enzyme function to be defective. In the present study, first we identified a substitution site in four Chinese infantile patients with Pompe disease which is a cytidine to adenosine (C1935-->A) transversion at 5' end of exon 14 causing substitution of glutamic acid for aspartic acid at position 645 of the acid alpha-D-glucosidase. This substitution was introduced in wild-type cDNA and expressed in COS-1 cells. The Asp-645-->Glu substitution resulted in significant reduction of acid alpha-D-glucosidase activity. Second, according to the screening data in 25 Chinese Pompe disease patients using digestion of RT-PCR amplified specific fragment with Aat II, the restriction fragment length analysis showed that patients presented the 861 bp band and the normal individuals presented the 728 bp and 133 bp polymorphic bands. We found that the frequency of mutant allele is 0.8 in infantile patients with Chinese Pompe disease and 0 in normal individuals. These results therefore indicate that Asp-645-->Glu mutation results in infantile form of Pompe disease as the major cause in Chinese patients in Taiwan.",0
"Glycogen Storage Disease type II: genetic and biochemical analysis of novel mutations in infantile patients from Turkish ancestry. ||  || Glycogen Storage Disease type II (GSDII) is caused by the deficiency of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (acid maltase). This paper reports on the characterization of the molecular defects in 6 infantile patients from Turkish ancestry. Five of the 6 patients had reduced levels of the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase precursor. Conversion to mature enzyme was impaired in all cases, and the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase activity in all patients fibroblasts was less than 0.5% of control. DNA sequence analysis revealed 3 new mutations. One mutation, found in 3 patients in homozygous form, was a double insertion in exon 19 (2471AG-->CAGG) leading to a frameshift after Pro 913. It is the first insertion mutation described in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene. Two patients were homozygous for missense mutations leading to the substitution of Ser to Pro at amino acid 566 (S566P) in one case and of Pro to Arg at amino acid 768 (P768R) in the other. One patient was found to have a Gly to Arg missense mutation at amino acid 643 (G643R), previously identified in an adult patient (Hermans et al., 1993), combined with a silent second allele. The latter 3 mutations were introduced in the wild type lysosomal alpha-glucosidase cDNA and expressed in COS cells to analyze their effect. Precursor species of 110 kD were formed but the maturation was impaired. As a result there was an overall deficiency of catalytic activity, which is in accordance with the findings in the patients fibroblasts and with the clinical phenotype.",1 0
"Multiplex assessment of protein variant abundance by massively parallel sequencing. ||  || Determining the pathogenicity of genetic variants is a critical challenge, and functional assessment is often the only option. Experimentally characterizing millions of possible missense variants in thousands of clinically important genes requires generalizable, scalable assays. We describe variant abundance by massively parallel sequencing (VAMP-seq), which measures the effects of thousands of missense variants of a protein on intracellular abundance simultaneously. We apply VAMP-seq to quantify the abundance of 7,801 single-amino-acid variants of PTEN and TPMT, proteins in which functional variants are clinically actionable. We identify 1,138 PTEN and 777 TPMT variants that result in low protein abundance, and may be pathogenic or alter drug metabolism, respectively. We observe selection for low-abundance PTEN variants in cancer, and show that p.Pro38Ser, which accounts for ~10% of PTEN missense variants in melanoma, functions via a dominant-negative mechanism. Finally, we demonstrate that VAMP-seq is applicable to other genes, highlighting its generalizability.",0
