Abstract,Classification
"Mutation at the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) and its use to document population genetic variation: the Quebec experience. || Alleles Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Chromosomes, Human, Pair 12 Databases, Factual Genetic Variation Haplotypes Homozygote Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Quebec || We describe variation at the PAH locus in the population of Quebec. We successfully analyzed 135 of 141 chromosomes from phenylketonuria (PKU) probands (95.7% of the sample), and eight additional chromosomes from a small number of probands with non-PKU hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA). The full set of chromosomes harboured 45 different PAH mutations: i) seven polymorphisms (IVS2nt19, IVS3nt-22, IVS6nt-55, Q232Q, V245V, L385L, Y414Y); ii) four mutations causing non-PKU HPA (T92I, E390G, R408Q, D415N); iii) 34 mutations causing PKU. Only six mutations (M1V, R261Q, F299C, S349P, R408W and IVS12nt1) occurred in the whole province at relative frequencies > 5%: most are rare and probably identical by descent. By studying associations of mutations with polymorphic haplotype alleles, we found examples of mutations on different haplotypes that were identical by state, but not by descent because they were recurrent mutations (E280K and R408W); and examples of mutations identical both by state and by descent because of intragenic recombination (S67P, G218V, V245A and IVS12nt1). Ten mutations were first described in Quebec and five are still unique there; three of these 'Quebec' mutations are reported here for the first time (c.125A-->T (K42I); [c.470G-->A; c.471A--C] (R157N); c.707nt-55 (IVS6nt-55). The PAH mutations stratify by geographic region and population, their distributions validating hypotheses about European range expansion to North America during three separate phases of immigration and demographic expansion in the Quebec region over the past four centuries. The PAH homozygosity value (j) is 0.06 for the total Quebec sample (0.5-0.08 by regions), and the corresponding homoallelic fraction of mutant PAH genotypes is 24%. These findings are a documentation of genetic diversity in the Quebec population.",3 4
"Bone marrow pathologic abnormalities in familial platelet disorder with propensity for myeloid malignancy and germline RUNX1 mutation. || Biopsy Blood Platelet Disorders Bone Marrow Clonal Evolution Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA Mutational Analysis Disease Progression Disease Susceptibility Family Female Follow-Up Studies Germ-Line Mutation Humans Immunophenotyping Karyotyping Male Myeloproliferative Disorders Pedigree || A subset of patients with familial platelet disorder with propensity to myeloid malignancy and germline RUNX1 mutation develops hematological malignancies, often myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia, currently recognized in the 2016 WHO classification. Patients who develop hematologic malignancies are typically young, respond poorly to conventional therapy, and need allogeneic stem cell transplant from non-familial donors. Understanding the spectrum of bone marrow morphologic and genetic findings in these patients is critical to ensure diagnostic accuracy and develop criteria to recognize the onset of hematologic malignancies, particularly myelodysplastic syndrome. However, bone marrow features remain poorly characterized. To address this knowledge gap, we analyzed the clinicopathologic and genetic findings of 11 patients from 7 pedigrees. Of these, 6 patients did not develop hematologic malignancies over a 22-month follow-up period; 5 patients developed hematologic malignancies (3 acute myeloid leukemia; 2 myelodysplastic syndrome). All patients had thrombocytopenia at initial presentation. All 6 patients who did not develop hematologic malignancies showed baseline bone marrow abnormalities: low-for-age cellularity (n=4), dysmegakaryopoiesis (n=5), megakaryocytic hypoplasia/hyperplasia (n=5), and eosinophilia (n=4). Two patients had multiple immunophenotypic alterations in CD34-positive myeloblasts; 1 patient had clonal hematopoiesis. In contrast, patients who developed hematologic malignancies had additional cytopenia(s) (n=4), abnormal platelet granulation (n=5), bone marrow hypercellularity (n=4), dysplasia in ≥2 lineages including megakaryocytes (n=3) and acquired clonal genetic aberrations (n=5). In conclusion, our study demonstrated that specific bone marrow abnormalities and acquired genetic alterations may be harbingers of progression to hematological malignancies in patients with familial platelet disorder with germlineRUNX1 mutation.",4
"Molecular and phenotypic abnormalities in individuals with germline heterozygous PTEN mutations and autism. || Adolescent Autism Spectrum Disorder Brain Case-Control Studies Child Female Genetic Association Studies Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Mutation, Missense PTEN Phosphohydrolase Prospective Studies Synaptic Transmission Young Adult || PTEN is a tumor suppressor associated with an inherited cancer syndrome and an important regulator of ongoing neural connectivity and plasticity. The present study examined molecular and phenotypic characteristics of individuals with germline heterozygous PTEN mutations and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (PTEN-ASD), with the aim of identifying pathophysiologic markers that specifically associate with PTEN-ASD and that may serve as targets for future treatment trials. PTEN-ASD patients (n=17) were compared with idiopathic (non-PTEN) ASD patients with (macro-ASD, n=16) and without macrocephaly (normo-ASD, n=38) and healthy controls (n=14). Group differences were evaluated for PTEN pathway protein expression levels, global and regional structural brain volumes and cortical thickness measures, neurocognition and adaptive behavior. RNA expression patterns and brain characteristics of a murine model of Pten mislocalization were used to further evaluate abnormalities observed in human PTEN-ASD patients. PTEN-ASD had a high proportion of missense mutations and showed reduced PTEN protein levels. Compared with the other groups, prominent white-matter and cognitive abnormalities were specifically associated with PTEN-ASD patients, with strong reductions in processing speed and working memory. White-matter abnormalities mediated the relationship between PTEN protein reductions and reduced cognitive ability. The Pten(m3m4) murine model had differential expression of genes related to myelination and increased corpus callosum. Processing speed and working memory deficits and white-matter abnormalities may serve as useful features that signal clinicians that PTEN is etiologic and prompting referral to genetic professionals for gene testing, genetic counseling and cancer risk management; and could reveal treatment targets in trials of treatments for PTEN-ASD.",3 4
"The TP53 mutation, R337H, is associated with Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndromes in Brazilian families. || Base Sequence Brazil DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Mutation, Missense Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || A TP53 germline mutation, R337H, has been previously described in children from southern Brazil with adrenocortical tumours but no documented familial history of other cancers. Here, we have screened for TP53 mutation 45 Brazilian unrelated individuals with family histories fulfilling the clinical definitions of Li-Fraumeni (LFS) or Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) syndromes. Mutations were found in 13 patients (28.9%), including six (46.1%) R337H mutations, and four novel germline mutations (V173M, V197M, G244D and IVS6+1G>T). Families with the R337H mutation presented a wide spectrum of tumours, including breast cancers (30.4%), brain cancers (10.7%), soft tissue sarcomas (10.7%) and adrenocortical carcinomas (8.9%). Testing of 53 Brazilian subjects with no cancer history showed that R337H was not a common polymorphism in that population. Moreover, loss of heterozygocity with retention of the R337H allele was observed in a breast adenocarcinoma, supporting a role for this mutation in breast tumorigenesis. These results show that the TP53 R337H germline mutation predisposes to a larger spectrum of tumours, similar to the one reported for other TP53 mutations.",3 4
"Spectrum of LDL receptor gene mutations in heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. ||  || Familial hypercholesterolemia by usual definition reflects mutations of the LDL-receptor gene. Extensive molecular characterization of mutations ascertained mainly through homozygotes (the Dallas collection) has been presented by Hobbs et al. (Hum Mutat 1:445-446, 1992). This paper catalogues a spectrum of 134 mutations (27 novel mutations in 45 patients, 24 previously described mutations in 89 patients) ascertained through heterozygotes from the analysis of 791 patients with definite, probable, or possible FH, mainly from the UK, using high-throughput modifications of the single-strand conformation polymorphism technique. From a composite database of LDL receptor gene mutations complied from these two sets and from the literature, deductions are made about ascertainment bias, mutation rates, and molecular heterogeneity. Calculations suggest that there may be a large number of rare amino acid variants in the general population not causing classic FH. Approaches to, and feasibility of, molecular diagnostics are considered.",4
