Abstract,Classification
"PTEN in colorectal cancer: a report on two Cowden syndrome patients. || Adult Colorectal Neoplasms Female Follow-Up Studies Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Heterozygote Humans Loss of Heterozygosity Male PTEN Phosphohydrolase Prospective Studies || Heterozygous germline PTEN mutations cause Cowden syndrome. The risk of colorectal cancer in Cowden patients, however, remains a matter of debate. We describe two patients presenting with colorectal cancer at a young age (28 and 39 years) and dysmorphisms fitting the Cowden spectrum. Heterozygous germline mutations in PTEN were found in both patients. Moreover, analysis of the resected colorectal cancer specimens revealed loss of heterozygosity at the PTEN locus with retention of the mutated alleles, and greatly reduced or absent PTEN expression. Histologically and molecularly, the tumours showed resemblance with sporadic colorectal cancers, although they had prominent fibrotic stroma. Our data indicate that PTEN loss was involved in carcinogenesis in the two patients, supporting that colorectal cancer is part of the Cowden syndrome-spectrum. This is in line with data on sporadic colorectal cancer, mice studies and emerging epidemiological data on Cowden syndrome. Although the exact role of germline PTEN mutations in the carcinogenesis of colorectal cancer remains unclear, we think that Cowden syndrome should be in the differential diagnosis of colorectal cancer certainly in view of the possible prognostic and therapeutic consequences. Prospective follow-up and surveillance of PTEN mutation carriers from the age of 25 to 30 years in a study setting should clarify this issue.",3
"Mapping the functional landscape of frequent phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotypes promotes personalised medicine in phenylketonuria. || Europe Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Middle East Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Precision Medicine || In phenylketonuria, genetic heterogeneity, frequent compound heterozygosity, and the lack of functional data for phenylalanine hydroxylase genotypes hamper reliable phenotype prediction and individualised treatment. A literature search revealed 690 different phenylalanine hydroxylase genotypes in 3066 phenylketonuria patients from Europe and the Middle East. We determined phenylalanine hydroxylase function of 30 frequent homozygous and compound heterozygous genotypes covering 55% of the study population, generated activity landscapes, and assessed the phenylalanine hydroxylase working range in the metabolic (phenylalanine) and therapeutic (tetrahydrobiopterin) space. Shared patterns in genotype-specific functional landscapes were linked to biochemical and pharmacological phenotypes, where (1) residual activity below 3.5% was associated with classical phenylketonuria unresponsive to pharmacological treatment; (2) lack of defined peak activity induced loss of response to tetrahydrobiopterin; (3) a higher cofactor need was linked to inconsistent clinical phenotypes and low rates of tetrahydrobiopterin response; and (4) residual activity above 5%, a defined peak of activity, and a normal cofactor need were associated with pharmacologically treatable mild phenotypes. In addition, we provide a web application for retrieving country-specific information on genotypes and genotype-specific phenylalanine hydroxylase function that warrants continuous extension, updates, and research on demand. The combination of genotype-specific functional analyses with biochemical, clinical, and therapeutic data of individual patients may serve as a powerful tool to enable phenotype prediction and to establish personalised medicine strategies for dietary regimens and pharmacological treatment in phenylketonuria.",3 1 0
"The mutant genotype is the main determinant of the metabolic phenotype in phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. || Alleles Amino Acid Substitution Animals COS Cells Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic Genotype Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Phenylketonuria and mild hyperphenylalaninemias are allelic disorders caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. Following identification of the disease-causing mutation in 11 PAH-deficient patients, we tested the activity of the mutant gene products in an eukaryotic expression system. Two mutations markedly reduced PAH activity (A259V and L333F), one mutation mildly altered the enzyme activity (E390G), while the majority of mutant genotypes reduced the in vitro expression of PAH activity to 15-30% of controls. Comparing the predicted residual activity derived from expression studies to the clinical phenotypes of our PAH-deficient patients, we found that homozygosity for the L333F and E390G mutations resulted in severe and mild PAH deficiencies, respectively, both in vivo and in vitro, while compound heterozygosity (L333F/E390G) resulted in an intermediate dietary tolerance. Similarly, in vitro expression studies largely predicted dietary tolerance in compound heterozygotes for the A259V/IVS12nt1 (typical PKU), A259V/A403V, G218V/I65T, and G218V/R158Q mutations (mild variants). Taken together, these results support the view that expression studies are useful in predicting residual enzyme activity and that the mutant genotype at the PAH locus is the major determinant of metabolic phenotype in hyperphenylalaninemias.",3 1 0
"Correlation between genotype and the tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive phenotype in Chinese patients with phenylketonuria. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Biopterin China DNA Mutational Analysis Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Predictive Value of Tests || A growing body of research has suggested that tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) responsive phenotype can be predicted by the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotype in patients with phenylketonuria (PKU), but data concerning the association between genotype and BH4 responsiveness are scarce in China. A total of 165 PKU patients from China who had undergone a 24-h loading test with BH4 administration were recruited. Genotyping was performed by the next-generation sequencing (NGS) technique. Using the predicted residual PAH activity, we analyzed the association between genotype and BH4-responsiveness. Among the 165 patients, 40 patients (24.24%) responded to BH4. A total of 74 distinct mutations were observed, including 13 novel mutations. The mutation p.R241C was most frequently associated with response. Two known mutations (p.A322T and p.Q419R) and two novel mutations (p.L98V and IVS3-2A>T) were first reported as responsive to BH4. Residual PAH activity of at least 12.5% was needed for responsive genotypes. Genotype-based predictions of BH4-responsiveness are only for selecting potential responders. Accordingly, it is necessary to test potential responders with a long-term BH4 challenge.",3 1
"Germline mutations in the PTEN/MMAC1 gene in patients with Cowden disease. || Adult Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10 DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genes, Tumor Suppressor Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Cowden disease, also known as multiple hamartoma syndrome, is an autosomal dominant cancer syndrome with a high risk of breast and thyroid cancer. The gene involved has been localized to chromosome 10q22-23. Recently, the tumour suppressor gene PTEN/MMAC1, encoding a putative protein tyrosine or dual-specificity phosphatase, was cloned from that region and three mutations were detected in patients with Cowden disease. We confirmed that the PTEN/MMAC1 gene is indeed the gene for Cowden disease by a refined localization of the gene to the interval between D10S1761 and D10S541, which contains the PTEN/MMAC1 gene and, by mutation analysis in eight unrelated familial and 11 sporadic patients with Cowden disease. Eight different mutations were detected in various regions of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene. One mutation was detected twice. All detected changes in the gene can be predicted to have a very deleterious effect on the putative protein. Five of the nine patients have a mutation in exon 5 coding for the putative active site and flanking amino acids. Evaluation of the clinical data of the patients in which a mutation could be detected gives no clear indications for a correlation between the genotype and phenotype. In 10 patients no mutation could be detected so far. In support of the linkage data, no evidence has emerged from the phenotype of these patients suggestive for genetic heterogeneity.",3
"Mutations in exon 3 of the PAH gene causing mild hyperphenylalaninemia. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Female Genotype Humans Infant Male Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Phenylketonuria (PKU), an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), is clinically very heterogeneous. On molecular level more than 350 mutations in the PAH gene are known to date, which in different genotype combinations could account for biochemical and clinical variability. Mutations located in exon 3 coding for a part of the regulatory domain of the PAH enzyme cause classical PKU, mild PKU, and mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP). We describe the phenotypic effects of seven mutations in exon 3 of the PAH gene (R68G, R68S, R71H, S87R, P89S, I95F, and A104D). We propose that mutations located between amino acid positions 71 through 94 cause MHP.",2 1 3
"PTEN c.511C>T nonsense mutation in a BRRS family disrupts a potential exonic splicing enhancer and causes exon skipping. || Exons Female Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phenotype RNA Splicing Regulatory Sequences, Ribonucleic Acid || Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by macrocephaly, intestinal hamartomatous polyps, lipomas and pigmented macules of the glans penis. We identified a Thai family affected with BRRS. In addition to typical manifestations of BRRS, the proband has a large hepatic AVM which is rarely found in BRRS. The molecular analysis revealed affected members were heterozygous for an exon skipping-associated nonsense mutation c.511C>T in the PTEN gene. The mutation was previously assumed to be deleterious by causing a change to a termination codon, Q171X. We, herein, found that another pathogenic effect was splicing related by disrupting a potential exonic splicing enhancer (ESE) and causing an entire exon 6 skipping. The results prompted us to investigate other reported missense/nonsense mutations in the PTEN gene. We found that they do not colocalize with ESE sites, suggesting that most of their pathogenic effects are not through ESE disruption.",3 0
Concurrence of germline mutations in the APC and PTEN genes in a colonic polyposis family member. ||  || ,3
"Preliminary studies on the molecular basis of hyperphenylalaninemia in Egypt. || Alleles Biopterin Egypt Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel Genetic Testing Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Sequence Analysis || Mutation analysis at the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) locus was undertaken in 56 Egyptian hyperphenylalaninemic patients. Selected screening for 11 known mutations and denaturing Gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis of the entire coding sequence and exon/intron boundaries led to the identification of a new mutation (I224T), four previously described mutations, and several polymorphisms. Overall, 18 mutant alleles could thus be characterized. In contrast to the high mutation detection rate typical of the DGGE-based scanning approach, only 6 of 16 mutant alleles tested were identified. Since BH4 deficiency could not be excluded in any of these patients, the latter results may be explained by the occurrence of mutations affecting the genes controlling the synthesis and recycling of tetrahydrobiopterin: the cofactor of PAH. An alternative hypothesis is also discussed.",3
"Fast clinical molecular diagnosis of hyperphenylalaninemia using next-generation sequencing-based on a custom AmpliSeq™ panel and Ion Torrent PGM sequencing. || Base Sequence Frameshift Mutation High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Hydro-Lyases Infant, Newborn Mutation Neonatal Screening Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Sequence Analysis, DNA Sequence Deletion || Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) can be classified into phenylketonuria (PKU) and tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency (BH4D), according to the defect of enzyme activity, both of which vary substantially in severity, treatment, and prognosis of the disease. To set up a fast and comprehensive assay in order to achieve early etiological diagnosis and differential diagnosis for children with HPA, we designed a custom AmpliSeq™ panel for the sequencing of coding DNA sequence (CDS), flanking introns, 5' untranslated region (UTR) and 3' UTR from five HPA-causing genes (PAH, PTS, QDPR, GCH1, and PCBD1) using the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM) Sequencer. A standard group of 15 samples with previously known DNA sequences and a test group of 37 HPA patients with unknown mutations were used for assay validation and application, respectively. All variations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. In the standard group, all the known mutations were detected and were consistent with the results of previous Sanger sequencing. In the test group, we identified mutations in 71 of 74 alleles, with a mutation detection rate of 95.9%. We also found a frame shift deletion p.Ile25Metfs*13 in PAH that was previously unreported. In addition, 1 of 37 in the test group was inconsistent with either the molecular diagnosis or clinical diagnosis by traditional differential methods. In conclusion, our comprehensive assay based on a custom AmpliSeq™ panel and Ion Torrent PGM sequencing has wider coverage, higher throughput, is much faster, and more efficient when compared with the traditional molecular detection method for HPA patients, which could meet the medical need for individualized diagnosis and treatment.",3 1
"The spectrum and evolution of phenotypic findings in PTEN mutation positive cases of Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome. || Abnormalities, Multiple Craniofacial Abnormalities Family Health Female Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phenotype Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Proteins || ",2 3
"Identification of PTEN mutations in five families with Bannayan-Zonana syndrome. ||  || Germline mutations in PTEN, a putative tumor suppressor gene, has been identified in 2 autosomal dominant inherited hamartoma syndromes, Cowden syndrome (CS) and Bannayan-Zonana syndrome (BZS). While both diseases exhibit distinct phenotypic features, there seems to be a partial clinical overlap between the 2 diseases. To date, 9 families with BZS have been screened for PTEN mutations, of which 5 were found to exhibit mutations in this gene. We report 5 novel germline mutations in the PTEN coding sequence from 5 unrelated families with the BZS phenotype. While all the mutations we identified are novel in BZS, 1003C-->T (nonsense mutation) and 209+5G-->A (putative splice site mutation) have been previously reported in unrelated families with CS and Lhermitte Duclos disease. Interestingly, 1 of the families has an individual with BZS and 1 with CS phenotype, associated with a single PTEN mutation, 885insA. These data support the notion that CS and BZS may be within the spectrum of the same primary disorder.",3
"Functional characterisation of alpha-galactosidase a mutations as a basis for a new classification system in fabry disease. ||  || Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked hereditary defect of glycosphingolipid storage caused by mutations in the gene encoding the lysosomal hydrolase α-galactosidase A (GLA, α-gal A). To date, over 400 mutations causing amino acid substitutions have been described. Most of these mutations are related to the classical Fabry phenotype. Generally in lysosomal storage disorders a reliable genotype/phenotype correlation is difficult to achieve, especially in FD with its X-linked mode of inheritance. In order to predict the metabolic consequence of a given mutation, we combined in vitro enzyme activity with in vivo biomarker data. Furthermore, we used the pharmacological chaperone (PC) 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin (DGJ) as a tool to analyse the influence of individual mutations on subcellular organelle-trafficking and stability. We analysed a significant number of mutations and correlated the obtained properties to the clinical manifestation related to the mutation in order to improve our knowledge of the identity of functional relevant amino acids. Additionally, we illustrate the consequences of different mutations on plasma lyso-globotriaosylsphingosine (lyso-Gb3) accumulation in the patients' plasma, a biomarker proven to reflect the impaired substrate clearance caused by specific mutations. The established system enables us to provide information for the clinical relevance of PC therapy for a given mutant. Finally, in order to generate reliable predictions of mutant GLA defects we compared the different data sets to reveal the most coherent system to reflect the clinical situation.",3 4 0
"Germline mutations in PTEN are present in Bannayan-Zonana syndrome. || Animals Base Sequence Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10 DNA Genes, Tumor Suppressor Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Molecular Sequence Data PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoprotein Phosphatases Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Tumor Suppressor Proteins || ",2 3
"Molecular genetics of the LDL receptor gene in familial hypercholesterolemia. ||  || The low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor is a cell surface transmembrane protein that mediates the uptake and lysosomal degradation of plasma LDL, thereby providing cholesterol to cells. Mutations disrupting the function of this receptor produce autosomal dominant familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). Affected individuals have elevated plasma levels of LDL, which causes premature coronary atherosclerosis. To date, 71 mutations in the LDL receptor gene have been characterized at a molecular level. In this report, we describe 79 additional mutations and review the insights that all 150 mutations have provided into the structure/function relationship of the receptor protein and the clinical manifestations of FH.",3 4 0
"Fabry disease: 45 novel mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A gene causing the classical phenotype. || Fabry Disease Female Genetic Diseases, X-Linked Humans Leukocytes Male Mutation Sequence Deletion alpha-Galactosidase || The nature of the molecular lesions in the alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A) gene causing Fabry disease was determined in 50 unrelated families with the classic phenotype of this X-linked recessive lysosomal storage disease. Genomic DNA was isolated from affected males or obligate carrier females, and the entire alpha-Gal A coding region as well as the flanking and intronic sequences were analyzed by PCR amplification and automated sequencing. Forty-five new mutations were identified including 38 single base substitutions (32 missense and four nonsense) and nine gene rearrangements: MIR, M42T, G43D, G43V, H46Y, F50C, L68F, G132R, T141I, Y152X, K168R, G183S, V199M, P205R, Y207S, Q221X, C223R, C223Y, D234Y, G271C, A288P, P293A, R301G, I303N, I317T, E341D, P362L, R363C, R363H, G373D, I384N, T385P, Q396X, E398K, S401X, P409A, g7325insC, g7384del13, g8341delG, g8391del4/ins3, g10511delTAGT, g10704delACAG, g11019insG, g11021insG, and g11048delAGG. In the remaining five Fabry families, four previously reported mutations were detected (W81X, R112C, g11011delTC, and g11050delGAG) of which the R112C substitution was found in two families who were unrelated by haplotyping. These studies further define the heterogeneity of mutations in the alpha-Gal A gene causing the classical Fabry disease phenotype, and permit precise carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis in these families.",3 4
"SLC26A4 gene is frequently involved in nonsyndromic hearing impairment with enlarged vestibular aqueduct in Caucasian populations. || Adolescent Adult Alleles Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Connexin 26 Connexins Deafness European Continental Ancestry Group Female Goiter Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Homozygote Humans Infant Male Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Prevalence Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Vestibular Aqueduct || Sensorineural hearing loss is the most frequent sensory deficit of childhood and is of genetic origin in up to 75% of cases. It has been shown that mutations of the SLC26A4 (PDS) gene were involved in syndromic deafness characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing impairment and goitre (Pendred's syndrome), as well as in congenital isolated deafness (DFNB4). While the prevalence of SLC26A4 mutations in Pendred's syndrome is clearly established, it remains to be studied in large cohorts of patients with nonsyndromic deafness and detailed clinical informations. In this report, 109 patients from 100 unrelated families, aged from 1 to 32 years (median age: 10 years), with nonsyndromic deafness and enlarged vestibular aqueduct, were genotyped for SLC26A4 using DHPLC molecular screening and sequencing. In all, 91 allelic variants were observed in 100 unrelated families, of which 19 have never been reported. The prevalence of SLC26A4 mutations was 40% (40/100), with biallelic mutation in 24% (24/100), while six families were homozygous. All patients included in this series had documented deafness, associated with EVA and without any evidence of syndromic disease. Among patients with SLC26A4 biallelic mutations, deafness was more severe, fluctuated more than in patients with no mutation. In conclusion, the incidence of SLC26A4 mutations is high in patients with isolated deafness and enlarged vestibular aqueduct and could represent up to 4% of nonsyndromic hearing impairment. SLC26A4 could be the second most frequent gene implicated in nonsyndromic deafness after GJB2, in this Caucasian population.",3 1 4
"Molecular basis of phenylketonuria and a correlation between genotype and phenotype in a heterogeneous southeastern US population. || Alleles Base Sequence Ethnic Groups Europe Forecasting Gene Expression Regulation Genetics, Population Genotype Georgia Heterozygote Humans Infant, Newborn Molecular Biology Mutation Neonatal Screening Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Sequence Analysis || To determine the molecular basis of phenylketonuria (PKU) and related hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) and to establish correlations between phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotypes and biochemical and clinical phenotypes in an ethnically diverse US population, PAH genotypes were determined in 35 patients with PKU or HPA and 1 carrier from the Medical Genetics Clinic of the Emory University School of Medicine. Patients were identified through Georgia's population-based newborn screening program. PAH genotypes in these individuals were determined from dried blood spots or whole-blood samples using a combination of polymerase chain reaction-mediated amplification, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, and direct-sequence analysis. The phenotypic severity of patients with PKU and HPA was based on pretreatment serum phenylalanine (PHE) levels during the neonatal period and on dietary tolerance of PHE later in life. Sixty-eight (96%) of 71 mutant alleles were identified. Major mutations in this population included R408W (11 of 71), I65T (11 of 71), Y414C (6 of 71), L348V (4 of 71), and IVS10 (4 of 71). Five new nucleotide substitutions, E76A (1 of 71), R241L (1 of 71), Q304R (2 of 71), C334S (1 of 71), and R400R (2 of 71) were also detected. Thirty-two of the thirty-five nonrelated patients examined in this study were completely genotyped. Strong correlations were observed between the level of PAH activity predicted from the genotype, when known from previous in vitro expression studies of the mutant proteins, and pretreatment serum PHE levels (r = .841) or clinical severity (Kendall rank-order correlation coefficient, .936). These results demonstrate strong correlations between PAH genotype and biochemical and clinical phenotypes in this heterogeneous American sample population, extending our previous findings from relatively homogeneous European populations. These correlations further demonstrate the clinical utility of genotype analysis in the treatment of patients with PKU and HPA.",3 1
"Male breast cancer in Cowden syndrome patients with germline PTEN mutations. || Adult Aged Breast Neoplasms Breast Neoplasms, Male DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Family Health Fatal Outcome Female Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Cowden syndrome (CS) (OMIM 158350) is a multiple hamartoma syndrome associated with germline mutations in the PTEN tumour suppressor gene. While CS is characterised most commonly by non-cancerous lesions (mucocutaneous trichilemmomas, acral and palmoplantar keratoses, and papillomatous papules), it is also associated with an increased susceptibility to breast cancer (in females) and thyroid cancer, as well as non-cancerous conditions of the breast and thyroid. Here we report two cases of male breast cancer occurring in patients with classical CS phenotypes and germline PTEN mutations. The first subject was diagnosed with CS indicated primarily by mucocutaneous papillomatosis, facial trichilemmomas, and macrocephaly with frontal bossing at the age of 31 years. He developed breast cancer at 41 years and subsequently died of the disease. A PTEN mutation, c.802delG, was identified in this subject, yet none of his family members showed evidence of a CS phenotype, suggesting that this PTEN mutation may be a de novo occurrence. The second subject had a CS phenotype including multiple trichilemmomas and thyroid adenoma, developed male breast cancer at 43 years, and died of the disease at 57 years. He was a carrier of a PTEN mutation c.347-351delACAAT that cosegregated with the CS phenotype in affected family members. These two cases of male breast cancer associated with germline PTEN mutations and the CS phenotype suggest that CS may be associated with an increased risk of early onset male as well as female breast cancer.",2 4 3
"A novel germline mutation of PTEN associated with brain tumours of multiple lineages. || Adult Amino Acid Substitution Apoptosis Brain Neoplasms Cell Division Cell Lineage DNA Mutational Analysis DNA, Neoplasm Enzyme Activation Frontal Lobe Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Insulin Loss of Heterozygosity Male Meningeal Neoplasms Meningioma Models, Molecular Mutation, Missense Neoplasm Proteins Neoplasms, Multiple Primary Oligodendroglioma PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Point Mutation Protein Conformation Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Proto-Oncogene Proteins Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt Transfection Tumor Suppressor Proteins U937 Cells || We have identified a novel germline mutation in the PTEN tumour suppressor gene. The mutation was identified in a patient with a glioma, and turned out to be a heterozygous germline mutation of PTEN (Arg234Gln), without loss of heterozygosity in tumour DNA. The biological consequences of this germline mutation were investigated by means of transfection studies of the mutant PTEN molecule compared to wild-type PTEN. In contrast to the wild-type molecule, the mutant PTEN protein is not capable of inducing apoptosis, induces increased cell proliferation and leads to high constitutive PKB/Akt activation, which cannot be increased anymore by stimulation with insulin. The reported patient, in addition to glioma, had suffered from benign meningioma in the past but did not show any clinical signs of Cowden disease or other hereditary diseases typically associated with PTEN germline mutations. The functional consequences of the mutation in transfection studies are consistent with high proliferative activity. Together, these findings suggest that the Arg234Gln missense mutation in PTEN has oncogenic properties and predisposes to brain tumours of multiple lineages.",3 0
"Screening for mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene from Italian patients with phenylketonuria by using the chemical cleavage method: a new splice mutation. || Base Sequence DNA Exons Genetic Testing Humans Italy Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length || To investigate the molecular basis of phenylketonuria in Italy we applied the chemical cleavage method (CCM) on amplified DNA encompassing exons 7 and 8 of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. These exons are in a region likely to be involved in enzyme function. Using this approach, we could simultaneously screen for novel mutations and for seven reported mutations which map in this area. Three mutations were identified. The first was shown to be a not previously described mutation: a G----A substitution at the 5' donor junction splice site of intron 7. The second change was a reported G----A mutation at codon 261. The third change corresponded to a polymorphism at codon 245. Our results indicate that CCM analysis of amplified genomic DNA fragments can be successfully used to search for mutations in large genes whose transcripts are not readily available.",3
"Molecular genetics of PKU in Poland and potential impact of mutations on BH4 responsiveness. ||  || Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) has been recently approved as a treatment of patients with phenylketonuria. However, as a confirmation of BH4-responsiveness, it might require a very expensive trial treatment with BH4 or prolonged BH4-loading procedures. The selection of patients eligible for BH4-therapy by means of genotyping of the PAH gene mutations may be recommended as a complementary approach. A population-wide genotyping study was carried out in 1286 Polish phenyloketonuria-patients. The aim was to estimate the BH4 demand and to cover prospectively the treatment by a National Health Fund. A total of 95 types of mutations were identified. Genetic variants corresponding with probable BH4-responsiveness were found in 28.2% of cases. However, patients with mild or classical phenylketonuria who require continuous treatment accounted for 11.4% of the studied population only. Analysis of the published data shows similar percentage of the ""BH4-responsive"" variants of a PAH gene in patients from other countries of Eastern Europe. Therefore, it can be concluded, that the proportion of phenylketonuria-patients who could benefit from the use of BH4 reaches approximately 10% in the entire region.",3 1
"Long-term treatment with tetrahydrobiopterin in phenylketonuria: treatment strategies and prediction of long-term responders. || Adolescent Biomarkers, Pharmacological Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Disease Management Drug Administration Schedule Female Humans Long-Term Care Male Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Prognosis Tyrosine || Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) responsive phenylketonuria has been described more than 10 years ago. However, criteria for the identification of long-term BH4 responsive patients are not yet established. 116 patients with phenylketonuria, aged 4-18 years, were screened for potential long-term BH4 responsiveness by at least two of the following criteria: positive neonatal BH4 loading test, putative BH4 responsive genotype, and/or milder phenotype. Patients had to be on permanent dietary treatment. 23 patients fulfilled these criteria and were tested for long-term BH4 responsiveness: 18/23 were long-term BH4 responsive, 5/23 were not. On long-term BH4 treatment over a period of 48 ± 27 months in a dose of 14.9 ± 3.3mg/kg/day phenylalanine tolerance was increased from 452 ± 201 mg/day to 1593 ± 647 mg/day, corresponding to a mean increase of 1141 ± 528 mg/day. Dietary phenylalanine intake was increased stepwise according to a clear defined protocol. In 8/18 patients, diet was completely liberalized; 10/18 patients still received phenylalanine-free amino acid formula with 0.63 ± 0.23 g/kg/day. The most predictive value for long-term BH4 responsiveness was the combination of pretreatment phenylalanine of < 1200 μmol/L, pretreatment phenylalanine/tyrosine ratio of <15, phenylalanine/tyrosine ratio of <15 on treatment, phenylalanine tolerance of >20mg/kg/day at age 3 years, positive neonatal BH4 loading, and at least one putative BH4 responsive mutation (p = 0.00024). Our data show that long-term BH4 responsiveness may be predicted already during neonatal period by determining maximum pretreatment phenylalanine and phenylalanine/tyrosine concentrations, neonatal BH4 loading and PAH genotype. A clear defined protocol is necessary to install long-term BH4 treatment.",3 1
"Molecular basis of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome: an update from the French LFS families. || Female France Gene Deletion Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Mutation, Missense Neoplasms Pedigree || We have performed an extensive analysis of TP53 in 474 French families suggestive of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), including 232 families fulfilling the Chompret criteria. We identified a germline alteration of TP53 in 82 families (17%), in 67/232 of the families fulfilling the Chompret criteria (29%) and in 15/242 which did not fulfil these criteria (6%). Most of the alterations corresponded to missense mutations (67%), and we identified in four families genomic deletions removing the entire TP53 locus, the promoter and the non-coding exon 1, or exons 2-10. These results represent a definitive argument demonstrating that LFS results from TP53 haplodeficiency. The mean ages of tumour onset were significantly different between patients harbouring TP53 missense mutations and other types of alterations, missense mutations being associated with a 9 year earlier tumour onset. These results confirm that missense mutations not only inactivate p53 but also have an additional oncogenic effect. Germline alterations of TP53 that lead exclusively to loss of function are therefore associated with a later age of tumour onset and the presence of such mutations should be considered in atypical LFS families with tumours diagnosed after 40 years.",3 4
"Inherited p53 gene mutations in breast cancer. || Adult Base Sequence Breast Neoplasms Female Genes, p53 Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree || Recent evidence has implicated germ-line mutations of the p53 gene as the cause of cancer susceptibility in the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, associated with the development of breast cancer and other neoplasms. Furthermore, somatic mutations of the p53 gene have been detected in a high percentage of non-familial breast cancers. We therefore sought to identify potential carriers of p53 gene mutations in a cohort of patients with early onset breast cancer. We examined 126 consecutive patients who developed breast cancer at or before the age of 40 for mutations of p53 within conserved regions of the gene. One patient with an inherited germ-line mutation of the p53 gene was identified but the functional significance of this mutation was not clear. It thus appears that only a small percentage of patients with breast cancer under the age of 40 carry germ-line mutations of the p53 gene, an observation which has implications for potential screening and risk assessment in such patients.",3
"[Mutational spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene and identification of novel mutations in patients with hyperphenylalaninemia in Jiangsu province]. ||  || To study the characteristics of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene mutations in patients with hyperphenylalaninemia from Jiangsu province by DNA sequencing, and to analyze the spectrum of PAH gene mutations. A total of 70 patients and their parents were included in this study. All of the 13 exons and flanking introns of the PAH gene were analyzed with DNA sequencing. Forty five types of mutations were identified, which included 4 novel mutations (L37P, H107R, Q267L, S391T). A total of 125 mutations were identified in 140 alleles (89.3%). All mutations were detected in exons 2-3, 5-7, 9-12 and introns 2, 4, 7 and 8. Most mutations were found in exons 6, 7 and 12. EX6-96A > G, R243Q and R241C were the most common mutations. The mutational spectrum of Jiangsu province seems to be different from other regions. The spectrum can offer reliable information for genetic diagnosis of patients with hyperphenylalaninemia.",3
"E-cadherin genetic screening and clinico-pathologic characteristics of early onset gastric cancer. || Adult Antigens, CD Cadherins Cell Adhesion DNA Methylation Early Detection of Cancer Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Humans Loss of Heterozygosity Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Neoplasm Invasiveness Stomach Neoplasms || CDH1 germline alterations occur in about 40% of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) families. CDH1 germline mutations are also documented in few early onset diffuse gastric cancer patients (EODGC) without family history, but the real frequency in this setting in unknown. In these patients, the advanced stage at the time of diagnosis remains a clinical burden due to the poor long term survival. The entire coding region and exon flanking sequences of the CDH1 gene was analysed by direct sequencing in 21 EODGC patients aged ≤50 years. The potential deleterious nature for a new CDH1 missense variant was assessed by cell-cell aggregation and invasion assays. Somatic CDH1 mutation, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and promoter hypermethylation was explored in the tumour from one CDH1 germline mutation carrier. Two novel CDH1 germline variants were identified in 21 EODGC cases, c.670C>T and -63C>A. Functional analysis of the c.670C>T missense variant classified this mutation as non-pathogenic. The analysis of CDH1 somatic second hits failed to demonstrate E-cadherin structural and epigenetic alterations in the tumour sample. Data from the present work and a systematic review of the literature revealed that CDH1 germline mutations occurred in 7.2% of EOGC patients invariably with diffuse of mixed histology. From these, proved CDH1 mutation pathogenicity has been assigned only to 2.3% of the cases who were recurrently diagnosed before 35 years old. Germline CDH1 mutation remain the only germline genetic defect described in this type of patients and CDH1 mutation screening should be recommended for patients with these characteristics.",3 0
"Identification of a Variety of Mutations in Cancer Predisposition Genes in Patients With Suspected Lynch Syndrome. || Adult Biomarkers, Tumor Colorectal Neoplasms, Hereditary Nonpolyposis DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Expression Profiling Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Heredity High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Middle Aged Pedigree Phenotype Predictive Value of Tests Risk Assessment Risk Factors || Multigene panels are commercially available tools for hereditary cancer risk assessment that allow for next-generation sequencing of numerous genes in parallel. However, it is not clear if these panels offer advantages over traditional genetic testing. We investigated the number of cancer predisposition gene mutations identified by parallel sequencing in individuals with suspected Lynch syndrome. We performed germline analysis with a 25-gene, next-generation sequencing panel using DNA from 1260 individuals who underwent clinical genetic testing for Lynch syndrome from 2012 through 2013. All patients had a history of Lynch syndrome-associated cancer and/or polyps. We classified all identified germline alterations for pathogenicity and calculated the frequencies of pathogenic mutations and variants of uncertain clinical significance (VUS). We also analyzed data on patients' personal and family history of cancer, including fulfillment of clinical guidelines for genetic testing. Of the 1260 patients, 1112 met National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) criteria for Lynch syndrome testing (88%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 86%-90%). Multigene panel testing identified 114 probands with Lynch syndrome mutations (9.0%; 95% CI, 7.6%-10.8%) and 71 with mutations in other cancer predisposition genes (5.6%; 95% CI, 4.4%-7.1%). Fifteen individuals had mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2; 93% of these met the NCCN criteria for Lynch syndrome testing and 33% met NCCN criteria for BRCA1 and BRCA2 analysis (P = .0017). An additional 9 individuals carried mutations in other genes linked to high lifetime risks of cancer (5 had mutations in APC, 3 had bi-allelic mutations in MUTYH, and 1 had a mutation in STK11); all of these patients met NCCN criteria for Lynch syndrome testing. A total of 479 individuals had 1 or more VUS (38%; 95% CI, 35%-41%). In individuals with suspected Lynch syndrome, multigene panel testing identified high-penetrance mutations in cancer predisposition genes, many of which were unexpected based on patients' histories. Parallel sequencing also detected a high number of potentially uninformative germline findings, including VUS.",3
"USH2A mutation analysis in 70 Dutch families with Usher syndrome type II. ||  || Usher syndrome type II (USH2) is characterised by moderate to severe high-frequency hearing impairment, progressive visual loss due to retinitis pigmentosa and intact vestibular responses. Three loci are known for USH2, however, only the gene for USH2a (USH2A) has been identified. Mutation analysis of USH2A was performed in 70 Dutch USH2 families. Ten mutations in USH2A were detected, of which three are novel, c.949C>A, c.2242C>T (p.Gln748X) and c.4405C>T (p.Gln1468X). Including 9 previously published Dutch USH2a families, estimates of the prevalence of USH2a in the Dutch USH2 population were made. Mutations were identified in 62% of the families. In 28% both mutated alleles were identified, whereas in 34% the mutation in only one allele was found. It is estimated that about 28% of the Dutch USH2 families have a different causative gene. Analysis of deduced haplotypes suggests that c.1256G>T (p.Cys419Phe) is a Dutch ancestral mutation, occurring in 16% of the alleles.",2 1 3
"Molecular basis of Fabry disease: mutations and polymorphisms in the human alpha-galactosidase A gene. ||  || Fabry disease, an X-linked inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism, results from mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A gene at Xq22.1. Studies of the mutations in unrelated Fabry families have identified a variety of lesions indicating the molecular genetic heterogeneity underlying the disease. Forty-nine different mutations have been described including five partial gene deletions, one partial gene duplication, nine small deletions and insertions, three splice junction consensus site alterations, and 31 coding region single base substitutions. Most mutations resulted in the classical disease phenotype; however, five missense mutations were detected in atypical hemizygotes who were asymptomatic or had symptoms confined to the heart, including N215S, which was described in three unrelated atypical males. Most mutations were confined to a single pedigree with the exception of N215S, R227Q, R227X, R342Q, and R342X, which were each found in several unrelated families. Five of the 14 coding region CpG dinucleotides were sites of point mutations including the CpGs in codons 227 and 342, which were each mutated in both orientations. The identification of the mutation in a given Fabry family permits precise prenatal diagnosis and heterozygote detection of other family members with this X-linked recessive disease. Studies of additional Fabry families will provide information on the nature and frequency of the mutations causing this disease as well as potential insights into the structure/function relationships of this lysosomal hydrolase.",3
"Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II) in Argentineans: clinical manifestations and identification of 9 novel mutations. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Argentina Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a deficiency in 1,4-alpha-glucosidase (EC.3.2.1.3), the enzyme required to hydrolyze lysosomal glycogen to glucose. While previous studies have focused on Pompe patients from Europe, the United States, and Taiwan, we have analyzed a group of South American Pompe patients to better understand the molecular basis of their disease. From 14 Argentinean patients diagnosed with either infantile or late-onset disease, we identified 14 distinct mutations in the acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) gene including nine novel variants (c.236_246del, c.377G>A, c.1099T>C, c.1397T>G, c.1755-1G>A, c.1802C>G, c.1978C>T, c.2281delGinsAT, and c.2608C>T). Three different families displayed the c.377G>A allelic variant, suggesting a higher frequency among a subset of Argentineans. Comparison of patients with similar or identical variations in the GAA gene highlights the phenotypic diversity of late-onset disease and supports a role for other genetic and environmental factors in disease presentation.",3 1 4
"Prioritizing Variants in Complete Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Genes in Patients Lacking Known BRCA Mutations. || BRCA1 Protein BRCA2 Protein Female Gene Regulatory Networks Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Variation Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome Humans Middle Aged Nucleic Acid Conformation RNA Splicing RNA, Messenger Sequence Analysis, DNA || BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) does not identify all pathogenic variants. Sequencing of 20 complete genes in HBOC patients with uninformative test results (N = 287), including noncoding and flanking sequences of ATM, BARD1, BRCA1, BRCA2, CDH1, CHEK2, EPCAM, MLH1, MRE11A, MSH2, MSH6, MUTYH, NBN, PALB2, PMS2, PTEN, RAD51B, STK11, TP53, and XRCC2, identified 38,372 unique variants. We apply information theory (IT) to predict and prioritize noncoding variants of uncertain significance in regulatory, coding, and intronic regions based on changes in binding sites in these genes. Besides mRNA splicing, IT provides a common framework to evaluate potential affinity changes in transcription factor (TFBSs), splicing regulatory (SRBSs), and RNA-binding protein (RBBSs) binding sites following mutation. We prioritized variants affecting the strengths of 10 splice sites (four natural, six cryptic), 148 SRBS, 36 TFBS, and 31 RBBS. Three variants were also prioritized based on their predicted effects on mRNA secondary (2°) structure and 17 for pseudoexon activation. Additionally, four frameshift, two in-frame deletions, and five stop-gain mutations were identified. When combined with pedigree information, complete gene sequence analysis can focus attention on a limited set of variants in a wide spectrum of functional mutation types for downstream functional and co-segregation analysis.",3
"Screening E-cadherin in gastric cancer families reveals germline mutations only in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer kindred. ||  || The International Gastric Cancer Linkage Consortium (IGCLC) predicted that up to 25% of families fulfilling the criteria for hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) would harbor CDH1 germline mutations. This was based on observations from the low number of diffuse gastric cancer families described at the time, and its validation would require analysis of larger numbers. Here we report the results of germline CDH1 mutation screening in 39 kindred with familial aggregation of gastric cancer, a subset of which fulfills the criteria defined by the IGCLC for HDGC. CDH1 germline mutations were detected in four of 11 (36.4%) HDGC families. No mutations were identified in 63.6% of HDGC families or in kindred with familial aggregation of gastric cancer not fulfilling criteria for HDGC. These results add support to the evidence that only HDGC families harbor germline mutations in CDH1 and that genes other than CDH1 remain to be identified.",3
"Long-term prognosis of patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease diagnosed by newborn screening and treated since birth. || Age of Onset Female Follow-Up Studies Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Incidence Infant Infant, Newborn Male Neonatal Screening Prognosis Prospective Studies Recombinant Proteins Survival Rate Taiwan Time Factors alpha-Glucosidases || To determine the benefit of newborn screening for the long-term prognosis of patients with classic infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD). A cohort of patients with classic IOPD were diagnosed by newborn screening, treated with recombinant human acid α-glucosidase (rhGAA), and followed prospectively. Outcome measurements included survival, left ventricular mass, serum creatinine kinase, motor function, mental development, and systemic manifestations. Ten patients who presented with left ventricular hypertrophy at diagnosis received rhGAA infusions starting at a median age of 16 days (6-34 days). All patients were cross-reactive immunologic material-positive. After a median treatment time of 63 months (range 28-90 months), all could walk independently, and none required mechanical ventilation. All patients had motor capability sufficient for participating in daily activities, but muscle weakness over the pelvic girdle appeared gradually after 2 years of age. Ptosis was present in one-half of the patients, and speech disorders were common. Anti-rhGAA antibody titers were low (median maximal titer value 1:1600, range: undetectable ∼ 1:12,800). By studying patients treated since birth who have no significant anti-rhGAA antibody interference, this prospective study demonstrates that the efficacy of rhGAA therapy is high and consistent for the treatment of classic IOPD. This study also exposes limitations of rhGAA treatment. The etiology of the manifestations in these early-treated patients will require further study.",3 1 4
"Molecular basis of phenylketonuria in Venezuela: presence of two novel null mutations. ||  || This report describes the mutational spectrum and linked haplotypes of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in Venezuela. In this study, we have detected European mutations such as IVS10nt-11, R243Q, and R408W on the same haplotype background (6.7, 1.8, and 2.3, respectively) as in Europe. In this sample, we have found two novel mutations: S349L detected in two homozygous siblings on the background of haplotype 6.7, and a small deletion, P314fsdelC, that results in a frameshift and a premature stop codon detected on the background of haplotype 4.3. The definite demonstration that mutation S349L results in a nonfunctional protein was shown by expression analysis in prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems. This mutation results in an unstable phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) protein completely devoid of enzymatic activity well correlated with the severe form of the disease exhibited by the homozygous patients.",3
"Pancreatic adenocarcinoma with a germline PTEN p.Arg234Gln mutation. || Aged, 80 and over Carcinoma, Pancreatic Ductal Exome Fatal Outcome Female Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic Germ-Line Mutation Humans Immunohistochemistry Mutation, Missense PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pancreas Pancreatectomy Pancreatic Neoplasms Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras) Tomography, X-Ray Computed Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || A minor fraction of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) develops in association with germline mutations of the genes responsible for inherited cancer syndromes. However, the PDAC that has a germline PTEN mutation has not received much attention. Genome-wide whole exome sequencing was performed on germline and somatic DNA from an 82-year-old woman who had developed a solid pancreatic cancer but did not show characteristic findings of PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes (PHTS). Histology of the resected pancreatic tumor showed unique PDAC findings of primarily dendriform structures and dense fibrous tissue, accompanied by multiple pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasias in the vicinity. The tumor immunohistochemistry revealed a loss of PTEN expression and overexpression of TP53. Exome sequencing revealed a K-ras mutation (p.Gly12Val). Germline exome sequencing revealed a missense mutation of PTEN (p.Arg234Gln), a rare variant with a reported association with cancer development but not with other PHTS phenotypes. To our knowledge, this is the first report of PDAC associated with a germline PTEN mutation, particularly a rare variant (p.Arg234Gln) with cancer risks.",3
"Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome with posterior subcapsular congenital cataract and a consensus sequence splicing PTEN mutation. || Base Sequence Cataract Child Consensus Sequence Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase RNA Splicing || ",3 0
"The identification of two mis-sense mutations at the PAH gene locus in a Turkish patient with phenylketonuria. || Alleles Base Sequence Chromosome Mapping DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Glutamates Glutamic Acid Glycine Homozygote Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Nucleic Acid Hybridization Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Turkey || DNA sequence analysis of the 13 exons and intron/exon boundaries of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene has detected two base transitions, resulting in mis-sense mutations, in the genomic DNA of a Turkish patient (E1) with phenylketonuria (PKU). The Leu48----Ser amino acid substitution was associated with the mutant haplotype 3 allele and the Glu221----Gly amino acid substitution with the mutant haplotype 4 allele of this family. Allele-specific oligonucleotide (ASO) dot-blot analysis subsequently detected the Leu48----Ser mutation in the haplotype 4 PKU alleles of nine (18.8%) of the 48 unrelated Caucasian PKU families investigated. This mutation results in mild PKU in the homozygous state. The Glu221----Gly mutation has only been detected within patient E1 and his father.",3 1
"Frequent inactivation of PTEN/MMAC1 in primary prostate cancer. || Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10 DNA Methylation Gene Deletion Genes, Tumor Suppressor Humans In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence Male Microsatellite Repeats Polymerase Chain Reaction Prostatic Neoplasms || Sporadic prostate carcinoma is the most common male cancer in the Western world, yet many of the major genetic events involved in the progression of this often fatal cancer remain to be elucidated. Numerous cytogenetic and allelotype studies have reported frequent loss of heterozygosity on chromosomal arm 10q in sporadic prostate cancer. Deletion mapping studies have unambiguously identified a region of chromosome 10q23 to be the minimal area of loss. A new tumor suppressor gene, PTEN/MMAC1, was isolated recently at this region of chromosome 10q23 and found to be inactivated by mutation in three prostate cancer cell lines. We screened 80 prostate tumors by microsatellite analysis and found chromosome 10q23 to be deleted in 23 cases. We then proceeded with sequence analysis of the entire PTEN/MMAC1 coding region and tested for homozygous deletion with new intragenic markers in these 23 cases with 10q23 loss of heterozygosity. The identification of the second mutational event in 10 (43%) tumors establishes PTEN/MMAC1 as a main inactivation target of 10q loss in sporadic prostate cancer.",3
"Molecular basis for nonphenylketonuria hyperphenylalaninemia. || Base Sequence Exons Female Haplotypes Humans Infant, Newborn Male Metabolism, Inborn Errors Molecular Sequence Data Oligonucleotide Probes Pedigree Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Tyrosine || Nonphenylketonuria hyperphenylalaninemia (non-PKU HPA) is defined as phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency with blood phenylalanine levels below 600 mumol/liter (i.e., within the therapeutic range) on a normal dietary intake. Haplotype analysis at the PAH locus was performed in 17 Danish families with non-PKU HPA, revealing compound heterozygosity in all individuals. By allele-specific oligonucleotide (ASO) probing for common PKU mutations we found 12 of 17 non-PKU HPA children with a PKU allele on one chromosome. To identify molecular lesions in the second allele, individual exons were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and screened for mutations by single-strand conformation polymorphism. Two new missense mutations were identified. Three children had inherited a G-to-A transition at codon 415 in exon 12 of the PAH gene, resulting in the substitution of asparagine for aspartate, whereas one child possessed an A-to-G transition at codon 306 in exon 9, causing the replacement of an isoleucine by a valine in the enzyme. It is further demonstrated that the identified mutations have less impact on the heterozygote's ability to hydroxylate phenylalanine to tyrosine compared to the parents carrying a PKU mutation. The combined effect on PAH activity explains the non-PKU HPA phenotype of the child. The present observations that PKU mutations in combination with other mutations result in the non-PKU HPA phenotype and that particular mutation-restriction fragment length polymorphism haplotype combinations are associated with this phenotype offer the possibility of distinguishing PKU patients from non-PKU individuals by means of molecular analysis of the hyperphenylalaninemic neonate and, consequently, of determining whether a newborn child requires dietary treatment.",3 1
"Seven cases of Pompe disease from Greece. ||  || We present seven cases of Pompe disease (McKusick 232300; glycogen storage disease type II; acid maltase deficiency) from Greece. The onset of symptoms varied from early childhood to late adulthood, and the patients had quite variable duration of disease. All but one of them had muscle weakness and all had mildly to highly elevated serum creatine kinase. The diagnosis in all cases was confirmed by the finding of acid alpha-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.3/20) deficiency in cultured skin fibroblasts. Thirteen mutant alleles were identified and nine different pathogenic mutations were encountered. Four were new: c.2071_2072insAGCCG leads to frameshift and total loss of function; c.1856G > A (p.Ser619Asn) leads to 90-95% loss of function; and the splice-site mutations c.1552-3C > G and c.2331+4A > G reduce the number of correct splicing events by more than 90%. The splice-site mutation c.-32-13T > G (IVS1-13T > G) was encountered four times and seems equally common among Greek and other caucasians. The other mutations: c.925G > A (p.Gly309Arg), c.[307T > G; 271G > A] (p.Cys103Gly; Asp91Asn), c.271del and c.1655T > C (p.Leu552Pro) have been reported earlier. Our study highlights the heterogeneity of Pompe disease in Greece and provides tools for diagnosis and carrier detection.",3 1 0
"Maternal phenylketonuria in two Sicilian families identified by maternal blood phenylalanine level screening and identification of a new phenylalanine hydroxylase gene mutation (P407L) || Female Genetic Testing Humans Infant, Newborn Italy Mutation Neonatal Screening Pedigree Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonuria, Maternal Phenylketonurias Pregnancy || ",3 1
"New mutations in the GLA gene in Brazilian families with Fabry disease. || Brazil Exons Fabry Disease Family Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Mutation RNA Splice Sites Sequence Analysis, DNA alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism that results from mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A (GLA) gene. Evaluating the enzymatic activity in male individuals usually performs the diagnosis of the disease, but in female carriers the diagnosis based only on enzyme assays is often inconclusive. In this work, we analyzed 568 individuals from 102 families with suspect of FD. Overall, 51 families presented 38 alterations in the GLA gene, among which 19 were not previously reported in literature. The alterations included 17 missense mutations, 7 nonsense mutations, 7 deletions, 6 insertions and 1 in the splice site. Six alterations (R112C, R118C, R220X, R227X, R342Q and R356W) occurred at CpG dinucleotides. Five mutations not previously described in the literature (A156D, K237X, A292V, I317S, c.1177_1178insG) were correlated with low GLA enzyme activity and with prediction of molecular damages. From the 13 deletions and insertions, 7 occurred in exons 6 or 7 (54%) and 11 led to the formation of a stop codon. The present study highlights the detection of new genomic alterations in the GLA gene in the Brazilian population, facilitating the selection of patients for recombinant enzyme-replacement trials and offering the possibility to perform prenatal diagnosis.",3
"Development of a clinical assay for detection of GAA mutations and characterization of the GAA mutation spectrum in a Canadian cohort of individuals with glycogen storage disease, type II. || Alleles DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Predisposition to Disease Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease, type II (GSDII; Pompe disease; acid maltase deficiency) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations of the GAA gene that lead to deficient acid alpha-glucosidase enzyme activity and accumulation of lysosomal glycogen. Although measurement of acid alpha-glucosidase enzyme activity in fibroblasts remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of GSDII, analysis of the GAA gene allows confirmation of clinical or biochemical diagnoses and permits predictive and prenatal testing of individuals at risk of developing GSDII. We have developed a clinical molecular test for the detection of GAA mutations based on cycle sequencing of the complete coding region. GAA exons 2-20 are amplified in six independent PCR using intronic primers. The resulting products were purified and sequenced. Preliminary studies using this protocol were conducted with DNA from 21 GSDII-affected individuals from five centers across Canada. In total, 41 of 42 mutations were detected (96.7% detection rate). Mutations spanned intron 1 through exon 19 and included nine novel mutations. Haplotype analysis of recurrent mutations further suggested that three of these mutations are likely to have occurred independently at least twice. Additionally, we report the identification of the c.-32-13T>G GAA mutation in an individual with infantile variant GSDII, despite reports of this mutation being associated almost exclusively with late-onset forms of the disease. The development of a clinical molecular test provides an important tool for the management and counseling of families and individuals with GSDII, and has provided useful information about the GAA mutation spectrum in Canada.",3 1 4
"Sequence variation at the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in the British Isles. ||  || Using mutation and haplotype analysis, we have examined the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in the phenylketonuria populations of four geographical areas of the British Isles: the west of Scotland, southern Wales, and southwestern and southeastern England. The enormous genetic diversity of this locus within the British Isles is demonstrated in the large number of different mutations characterized and in the variety of genetic backgrounds on which individual mutations are found. Allele frequencies of the more common mutations exhibited significant nonrandom distribution in a north/south differentiation. Differences between the west of Scotland and southwestern England may be related to different events in the recent and past histories of their respective populations. Similarities between southern Wales and southeastern England are likely to reflect the heterogeneity that is seen in and around two large capital cities. Finally, comparison with more recently colonized areas of the world corroborates the genealogical origin by range expansion of several mutations.",3
"B-Cell depletion and immunomodulation before initiation of enzyme replacement therapy blocks the immune response to acid alpha-glucosidase in infantile-onset Pompe disease. || Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived Antigens, CD Autoantibodies B-Lymphocytes Biomarkers Drug Administration Schedule Drug Therapy, Combination Enzyme Replacement Therapy Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay Female Flow Cytometry Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunoglobulin G Immunoglobulins, Intravenous Immunosuppressive Agents Infant Male Mycophenolic Acid Rituximab Sirolimus Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || To evaluate whether B-cell depletion before enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) initiation can block acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) antibody responses and improve clinical outcomes. Six subjects with Pompe disease (including 4 cross-reacting immunologic material-negative infants) aged 2-8 months received rituximab and sirolimus or mycophenolate before ERT. Four subjects continued to receive sirolimus, rituximab every 12 weeks, and intravenous immunoglobulin monthly for the duration of ERT. Sirolimus trough levels, IgG, CD3, CD4, CD8, CD19, CD20, N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide, creatine kinase, creatine kinase-MB, C-reactive protein, platelets, alkaline phosphatase, gamma-glutamyl transferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and alanine aminotransferase were measured regularly. Immunomodulation achieved B-cell depletion without adverse effects. After 17-36 months of rituximab, sirolimus and ERT, all subjects lacked antibodies against GAA, 4 continued to gain motor milestones, yet 2 progressed to require invasive ventilation. The absence of infusion-associated reactions allowed the use of accelerated infusion rates. B-cell depletion and T-cell immunomodulation in infants naïve to ERT was accomplished safely and eliminated immune responses against GAA, thereby optimizing clinical outcome; however, this approach did not necessarily influence sustained independent ventilation. Importantly, study outcomes support the initiation of immunomodulation before starting ERT, because the study regimen allowed for prompt initiation of treatment.",3 1 0
"Identification and characterization of aberrant GAA pre-mRNA splicing in pompe disease using a generic approach. || Adolescent Adult Child Exons Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Introns Middle Aged Mutation RNA Splicing RNA, Messenger Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction alpha-Glucosidases || Identification of pathogenic variants in monogenic diseases is an important aspect of diagnosis, genetic counseling, and prediction of disease severity. Pathogenic mechanisms involved include changes in gene expression, RNA processing, and protein translation. Variants affecting pre-mRNA splicing are difficult to predict due to the complex mechanism of splicing regulation. A generic approach to systematically detect and characterize effects of sequence variants on splicing would improve current diagnostic practice. Here, it is shown that such approach is feasible by combining flanking exon RT-PCR, sequence analysis of PCR products, and exon-internal quantitative RT-PCR for all coding exons. Application of this approach to one novel and six previously published variants in the acid-alpha glucosidase (GAA) gene causing Pompe disease enabled detection of a total of 11 novel splicing events. Aberrant splicing included cryptic splice-site usage, intron retention, and exon skipping. Importantly, the extent of leaky wild-type splicing correlated with disease onset and severity. These results indicate that this approach enables sensitive detection and in-depth characterization of variants affecting splicing, many of which are still unrecognized or poorly understood. The approach is generic and should be adaptable for application to other monogenic diseases to aid in improved diagnostics.",3 1 4 0
"Prevalence of tetrahydrobiopterine (BH4)-responsive alleles among Austrian patients with PAH deficiency: comprehensive results from molecular analysis in 147 patients. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU, MIM 261600) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH, GenBank U49897.1, RefSeq NM_000277). To date more than 560 variants of the PAH gene have been identified. In Europe there is regional distribution of specific mutations. Due to recent progress in chaperone therapy, the prevalence of BH4-responsive alleles gained therapeutic importance. Here we report the mutational spectrum of PAH deficiency in 147 unrelated Austrian families. Overall mutation detection rate was 98.6 %. There was a total of 62 disease-causing mutations, including five novel mutations IVS4 + 6T>A, p.H290Y, IVS8-2A>G, p.A322V and p.I421S. The five most prevalent mutations found in patients were p.R408W, IVS12 + 1G>A, p.R261Q, p.R158Q and IVS2 + 5G>C. Neonatal phenylalanine levels before treatment were available in 114/147 patients. Prediction of BH4-responsiveness in patients with full genotypes was exclusively made according to published data. Among the 133 patients needing dietary treatment, 28.4 % are expected to be BH4 ""non-responsive"", 4.5 % are highly likely BH4-responsive, 35.8 % are probably BH4-responsive while no interpretation was possible for 31.3 %. The mutation data reflect the population history of Austria and provide information on the likely proportion of Austrian PKU patients that may benefit from BH4-therapy.",3 1
"Accurate molecular diagnosis of phenylketonuria and tetrahydrobiopterin-deficient hyperphenylalaninemias using high-throughput targeted sequencing. || Biopterin Cohort Studies Computational Biology Exons Gene Library Gene Rearrangement Genome, Human Genomics Genotype High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Phenylketonurias Reproducibility of Results Sensitivity and Specificity Sequence Analysis, DNA Sequence Deletion || Genetic diagnostics of phenylketonuria (PKU) and tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) deficient hyperphenylalaninemia (BH4DH) rely on methods that scan for known mutations or on laborious molecular tools that use Sanger sequencing. We have implemented a novel and much more efficient strategy based on high-throughput multiplex-targeted resequencing of four genes (PAH, GCH1, PTS, and QDPR) that, when affected by loss-of-function mutations, cause PKU and BH4DH. We have validated this approach in a cohort of 95 samples with the previously known PAH, GCH1, PTS, and QDPR mutations and one control sample. Pooled barcoded DNA libraries were enriched using a custom NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Choice array and sequenced using a HiSeq2000 sequencer. The combination of several robust bioinformatics tools allowed us to detect all known pathogenic mutations (point mutations, short insertions/deletions, and large genomic rearrangements) in the 95 samples, without detecting spurious calls in these genes in the control sample. We then used the same capture assay in a discovery cohort of 11 uncharacterized HPA patients using a MiSeq sequencer. In addition, we report the precise characterization of the breakpoints of four genomic rearrangements in PAH, including a novel deletion of 899 bp in intron 3. Our study is a proof-of-principle that high-throughput-targeted resequencing is ready to substitute classical molecular methods to perform differential genetic diagnosis of hyperphenylalaninemias, allowing the establishment of specifically tailored treatments a few days after birth.",3 1
"The spectrum of vascular anomalies in patients with PTEN mutations: implications for diagnosis and management. || Adipose Tissue Adolescent Arteriovenous Fistula Blood Flow Velocity Blood Vessels Case Management Child Child, Preschool Female Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Head Hemangioma Humans Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Melanosis Middle Aged Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phenotype Retrospective Studies || Mutations in the PTEN gene cause two disorders that predispose to cancer, Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba and Cowden syndromes. Some patients with a PTEN mutation have only macrocephaly and autism, but they may still be at risk for neoplasms. Vascular anomalies occur in patients with a PTEN mutation, but they have not been systematically studied or precisely defined. We analysed the clinical and radiological features of the vascular anomalies in 26 patients with PTEN mutations who were either seen or had their medical records reviewed at Children's Hospital Boston. All 23 patients who had their head circumference measured were macrocephalic, and all 13 male patients who were fully examined had penile freckling. Vascular anomalies were found in 14/26 (54%) of patients: 8/14 (57%) had multiple lesions and 11/13 (85%) who had cross-sectional imaging had intramuscular vascular lesions. Radiographic studies showed that 12/14 (86%) were fast-flow vascular anomalies, and angiography typically showed focal segmental dilatation of draining veins. Excessive ectopic fat in the vascular anomalies was present in 11/12 (92%) of patients on CT or MRI. Intracranial developmental venous anomalies (DVAs) were found in 8/9 (89%) of patients who had brain MRI with contrast. Vascular anomalies in patients with a PTEN mutation are typically multifocal intramuscular combinations of fast-flow channels and ectopic fat. Cerebral DVAs are very common. PTEN mutational analysis should be considered for all macrocephalic patients with fast-flow vascular anomalies or multiple intracranial DVAs.",3 4
"CRIM-negative infantile Pompe disease: characterization of immune responses in patients treated with ERT monotherapy. || Cross Reactions Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunoglobulin G Infant Infant, Newborn Isoantibodies Kaplan-Meier Estimate Male Mutation Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with recombinant human acid α-glucosidase (rhGAA) prolongs survival in infantile Pompe disease (IPD). However, the majority of cross-reactive immunologic material (CRIM)-negative (CN) patients have immune responses with significant clinical decline despite continued ERT. We aimed to characterize immune responses in CN patients with IPD receiving ERT monotherapy. A chart review identified 20 CN patients with IPD treated with ERT monotherapy for ≥6 months. Patients were stratified by anti-rhGAA antibody titers: high sustained antibody titers (HSAT; ≥51,200) at least twice; low titers (LT; <6,400) throughout treatment; or sustained intermediate titers (SIT; 6,400-25,600). Despite early initiation of treatment, the majority (85%) of CN patients developed significant antibody titers, most with HSAT associated with invasive ventilation and death. Nearly all patients with HSAT had at least one nonsense GAA mutation, whereas the LT group exclusively carried splice-site or frameshift mutations. Only one patient in the HSAT group is currently alive after successful immune modulation in the entrenched setting. Immunological responses are a significant risk in CN IPD; thus induction of immune tolerance in the naive setting should strongly be considered. Further exploration of factors influencing immune responses is required, particularly with the advent of newborn screening for Pompe disease.",3 1
"Germline PTEN mutations are rare and highly penetrant. ||  || Cowden syndrome (multiple hamartoma syndrome, MIM 158350) is an early onset syndrome characterized by multiple hamartomas in the skin, mucous membranes, breast, thyroid and endometrium. Patients with Cowden syndrome have increased risk of breast cancer, thyroid cancer and endometrial cancer. In 1997 germline mutations in PTEN were demonstrated to cause Cowden syndrome. We report the results of diagnostic and predictive testing in all families with Cowden syndrome or suspected Cowden syndrome registered at the Norwegian cancer family clinics. PTEN mutations were found in all six families meeting the clinical criteria for Cowden syndrome, in none of the two families assumed to have Cowden syndrome but not fulfilling the criteria, and in none of the eight families selected in our computerized medical files to have a combination of breast and thyroid cancers. Age-related penetrances for the various neoplasms are given. All families but one were small and de novo mutations were found.",3 4
"Identification of a point mutation in the human lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene causing infantile glycogenosis type II. || Alleles Animals Base Sequence Cell Line DNA Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel Exons Gene Expression Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Lysosomes Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Transfection alpha-Glucosidases || Two patients in a consanguineous Indian family with infantile glycogenosis type II were found to have a G to A transition in exon 11 of the human lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene. Both patients were homozygous and both parents were heterozygous for the mutant allele. The mutation causes a Glu to Lys substitution at amino acid position 521, just three amino acids downstream from the catalytic site at Asp-518. The mutation was introduced in wild type lysosomal alpha-glucosidase cDNA and the mutant construct was expressed in vitro and in vivo. The Glu to Lys substitution is proven to account for the abnormal physical properties of the patients lysosomal alpha-glucosidase precursor and to prevent the formation of catalytically active enzyme. In homozygous form it leads to the severe infantile phenotype of glycogenosis type II.",3 1 0
"Molecular characterisation of phenylketonuria in a Chinese mainland population using next-generation sequencing. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Child, Preschool China DNA Exons Female Genotype High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Infant Introns Male Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Sequence Analysis, DNA || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an inherited autosomal recessive disorder of phenylalanine metabolism, mainly caused by a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). The incidence of various PAH mutations differs among race and ethnicity. Here we report a spectrum of PAH mutations complied from 796 PKU patients from mainland China. The all 13 exons and adjacent intronic regions of the PAH gene were determined by next-generation sequencing. We identified 194 different mutations, of which 41 are not reported before. Several mutations reoccurred with high frequency including p.R243Q, p.EX6-96A > G, p.V399V, p.R241C, p.R111*, p.Y356*, p.R413P, and IVS4-1G > A. 76.33% of mutations were localized in exons 3, 6, 7, 11, 12. We further compared the frequency of each mutation between populations in northern and southern China, and found significant differences in 19 mutations. Furthermore, we identified 101 mutations that are not reported before in Chinese population, our study thus broadens the mutational spectrum of Chinese PKU patients. Additionally, 41 novel mutations will expand and improve PAH mutation database. Finally, our study offers proof that NGS is effective, reduces screening times and costs, and facilitates the provision of appropriate genetic counseling for PKU patients.",3
"MLH1 constitutional and somatic methylation in patients with MLH1 negative tumors fulfilling the revised Bethesda criteria. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adult Colorectal Neoplasms, Hereditary Nonpolyposis DNA Methylation DNA Mutational Analysis Female Humans Male Middle Aged MutL Protein Homolog 1 Nuclear Proteins Pedigree Promoter Regions, Genetic || Lynch syndrome (LS) is a tumor predisposing condition caused by constitutional defects in genes coding for components of the mismatch repair (MMR) apparatus. While hypermethylation of the promoter of the MMR gene MLH1 occurs in about 15% of colorectal cancer samples, it has also been observed as a constitutional alteration, in the absence of DNA sequence mutations, in a small number of LS patients. In order to obtain further insights on the phenotypic characteristics of MLH1 epimutation carriers, we investigated the somatic and constitutional MLH1 methylation status of 14 unrelated subjects with a suspicion of LS who were negative for MMR gene constitutional mutations and whose tumors did not express the MLH1 protein. A novel case of constitutional MLH1 epimutation was identified. This patient was affected with multiple primary tumors, including breast cancer, diagnosed starting from the age of 55 y. Investigation of her offspring by allele specific expression revealed that the epimutation was not stable across generations. We also found MLH1 hypermethylation in cancer samples from 4 additional patients who did not have evidence of constitutional defects. These patients had some characteristics of LS, namely early age at onset and/or positive family history, raising the possibility of genetic influences in the establishment of somatic MLH1 methylation.",3
"A European multicenter study of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency: classification of 105 mutations and a general system for genotype-based prediction of metabolic phenotype. || Alleles Europe Genotype Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Phenylketonuria (PKU) and mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP) are allelic disorders caused by mutations in the gene encoding phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). Previous studies have suggested that the highly variable metabolic phenotypes of PAH deficiency correlate with PAH genotypes. We identified both causative mutations in 686 patients from seven European centers. On the basis of the phenotypic characteristics of 297 functionally hemizygous patients, 105 of the mutations were assigned to one of four arbitrary phenotype categories. We proposed and tested a simple model for correlation between genotype and phenotypic outcome. The observed phenotype matched the predicted phenotype in 79% of the cases, and in only 5 of 184 patients was the observed phenotype more than one category away from that expected. Among the seven contributing centers, the proportion of patients for whom the observed phenotype did not match the predicted phenotype was 4%-23% (P<.0001), suggesting that differences in methods used for mutation detection or phenotype classification may account for a considerable proportion of genotype-phenotype inconsistencies. Our data indicate that the PAH-mutation genotype is the main determinant of metabolic phenotype in most patients with PAH deficiency. In the present study, the classification of 105 PAH mutations may allow the prediction of the biochemical phenotype in >10,000 genotypes, which may be useful for the management of hyperphenylalaninemia in newborns.",3 1
"Fabry disease and multiple sclerosis misdiagnosis: the role of family history and neurological signs. ||  || Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked inherited lysosomal storage disorder caused by α galactosidase A (α-gal A) deficiency. Central nervous system involvement and chronic white matter lesions are observed in both FD and multiple sclerosis (MS), which can confound the differential diagnosis. We analyzed the GLA gene, which encodes α-gal A, in 86 patients with clinical and neuroradiological findings consistent with MS to determine whether they had FD. We identified four women initially diagnosed with MS who hadGLA mutations associated with FD. Our results indicate that family history besides neurological findings should be evaluated in patients with an uncertain diagnosis of MS. Also the involvement of organs outside the central nervous system can support the FD diagnosis.",3 4
"PTEN and inherited hamartoma-cancer syndromes. || Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Tumor Suppressor Proteins || ",3
"[Six novel mutations in PAH gene detected by sequencing]. || DNA Mutational Analysis Female Humans Infant Male Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational || To explore new mutation in phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. The PAH genes from 40 phenylketonuria (PKU) patients and 30 normal controls were screened by PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and further sequencing. Eleven mutations and 3 polymorphisms in PAH gene were found. No abnormalities in the PAH gene from 30 controls were detected. M276K, M276R, 280insT, IVS10nt+32T-->A, IVS4nt+47C-->T were demonstrated as novel mutations in comparison with the PAH mutation database. One mission mutation (H290R) was first documented in Chinese PKU gene.",3
"[Novel mutations identified in exon 7 of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in Chinese]. || Child China Exons Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational || Exon 7 of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene was analyzed in 45 children affected with classic phenylketonuria (PKU) from northern China by using PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) technique and DNA direct sequencing. Six missense mutations (i.e. R243Q, R241H, G247V, L249H, P254I and G257V) and one silent mutation (V245V) were identified. The latter three missense mutations were demonstrated as novel mutations in comparison with the PAH mutation Database. One missense mutation (R241H) was first documented in Chinese. Our results showed population and regional differences in the PAH mutation distribution and suggest that there is more than one founding population for PKU in China. The finding of novel mutations will enhance our capability in molecular diagnosis of PKU.",3
"Spectrum of mutations in long-QT syndrome genes. KVLQT1, HERG, SCN5A, KCNE1, and KCNE2. || Adolescent Adult Aged Child DNA Mutational Analysis Female Frameshift Mutation Genotype Humans Long QT Syndrome Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Phenotype || Long-QT Syndrome (LQTS) is a cardiovascular disorder characterized by prolongation of the QT interval on ECG and presence of syncope, seizures, and sudden death. Five genes have been implicated in Romano-Ward syndrome, the autosomal dominant form of LQTS: KVLQT1, HERG, SCN5A, KCNE1, and KCNE2. Mutations in KVLQT1 and KCNE1 also cause the Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome, a form of LQTS associated with deafness, a phenotypic abnormality inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. We used mutational analyses to screen a pool of 262 unrelated individuals with LQTS for mutations in the 5 defined genes. We identified 134 mutations in addition to the 43 that we previously reported. Eighty of the mutations were novel. The total number of mutations in this population is now 177 (68% of individuals). KVLQT1 (42%) and HERG (45%) accounted for 87% of identified mutations, and SCN5A (8%), KCNE1 (3%), and KCNE2 (2%) accounted for the other 13%. Missense mutations were most common (72%), followed by frameshift mutations (10%), in-frame deletions, and nonsense and splice-site mutations (5% to 7% each). Most mutations resided in intracellular (52%) and transmembrane (30%) domains; 12% were found in pore and 6% in extracellular segments. In most cases (78%), a mutation was found in a single family or an individual.",3
"[The mutant spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in Northern Chinese]. ||  || To understand the mutant spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene in Northern Chinese. All the exons and flaking introns of PAH gene were detected by PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR/SSCP) and sequencing in 230 patients with phenylketonuria (PKU). (1) A total of 75 different mutations were detected in 435 out of 460 mutant alleles (94.6%). Among them 3 mutations (S251-R252>SfsX89, Y387D and A389G) have not been reported previously. The mutations, R243Q, EX6-96A>G, R111X, R413P and Y356X, were the prevalent mutations with relative frequencies of 21.7%, 10.2%, 8.3%, 6.5%, and 6.1% respectively, followed by V399V(4.1%), IVS4-1G>A (3.5%), IVS7+2T>A (2.2%) and R241C(2.2%). Most mutations were detected in exons 3, 5, 6, 7, 11 and 12 and flaking introns of PAH gene. (2) Ten polymorphism sites were detected in the study. Four sites, IVS3-22C>T, IVS10+97G>A, Q232Q and V245V, had high relative frequencies of 56.7%, 75.9%, 89.0% and 81.9% respectively. It would suggest that the race diversity exists in PAH cDNA sequence. The mutation spectrum of PAH gene in Northern Chinese is similar to other Asian populations but significantly different from European populations.",3 1
"Effects of immune modulation therapy in the first Croatian infant diagnosed with Pompe disease: a 3-year follow-up study. || Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived Croatia Drug Therapy, Combination Female Follow-Up Studies Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunologic Factors Immunosuppressive Agents Infant Injections, Intravenous Methotrexate Rituximab Treatment Outcome gamma-Globulins || Pompe disease is a storage disorder characterized by deficient or absent activity of the enzyme acid alpha-glucosidase. As a result of ineffective metabolism, glycogen accumulates in muscle tissues. Patients with a classic infantile-onset form present by the first few months of life with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and muscle weakness. If left untreated, these patients rapidly die of cardiorespiratory failure. A cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM)-negative status is predictive of high anti-alglucosidase alpha antibody titers. However, CRIM-positive patients also sometimes develop robust antibody titers. High antibody titers complicate therapeutic management, and those patients have a worse clinical outcome of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT).Four years ago, we successfully used an immune modulation therapy (IMT) protocol in a CRIM-positive infantile-onset patient with Pompe disease in whom ERT had to be discontinued because of severe infusion-associated reactions. She was found to be positive for anti-alglucosidase alpha antibodies. IMT (rituximab, methotrexate, and intravenous gammaglobulin) was started, and ERT was safely reintroduced during the IMT induction phase without any complications. Antibodies disappeared; IMT was tapered and discontinued; and cardiomyopathy steadily improved. During more than 3 years of follow-up, she remained ventilator dependent, and no gains in motor skills were noticed. The antibodies are still undetectable, and no adverse reactions associated with IMT had occurred. The cardiomyopathy is gradually increasing, but there is still ~ 50 % reduction as compared with the highest value measured. Although the reversal of clinical decline in our CRIM-positive and antibody-positive infant cannot be solely attributed to IMT, this protocol proved itself efficient and safe.",3 1
"Rapid progressive course of later-onset Pompe disease in Chinese patients. || Adolescent Adult Asian Continental Ancestry Group Enzyme Replacement Therapy Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Point Mutation Respiration, Artificial Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Taiwan Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease presents with a wide variety of phenotypes ranging from a fatal disease in infancy (the infantile-onset form) to other milder later-onset forms. Currently, the clinical manifestations in Chinese patients with later-onset Pompe disease are still not well understood. Fifteen Chinese patients who were clinically diagnosed with Pompe disease at later than one year of age at the National Taiwan University Hospital from 1993 to 2009 were included in this study. Confirmatory diagnosis included both biochemical and molecular tests. Patient outcomes after recombinant human acid α-glucosidase (GAA) therapy were also evaluated by assessing the percentage of predicted forced vital capacity in the upright position, hours of daily ventilator use, and the functional status change using Walton Gardner Medwin Scale. The median age at symptom onset was 15 (12-35)years, and the median age at diagnosis was 21 (10-38)years. At the time of diagnosis or shortly after, 8 patients (53%) required mechanical ventilation. A quadriceps muscle biopsy from a 13-year-old boy already showed extensive glycogen storage and muscle fiber destruction. Mutation analysis revealed that the two dual mutations in the GAA gene c.[1935C>A; 1726G>A] (p.[D645E; G576S]) and c.[2238G>C; 1726G>A] (p.[W746C; G576S]) represented 66.5% of the mutated chromosomes. Using mutagenesis, we showed that the p.G576S pseudodeficiency mutation significantly decreased the residual enzyme activity of p.W746C. Most patients responded poorly to recombinant human GAA. Chinese patients with later-onset Pompe disease often showed onset of symptoms in their second decade of life with rapid disease progression, which is probably due to a specific pattern of GAA gene mutation. Therefore, early diagnosis and early treatment would be necessary to improve the prognosis of these patients.",3 1 4 0
"Tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness in patients with phenylketonuria. || Adolescent Adult Biopterin Child, Preschool Dose-Response Relationship, Drug Female Humans Infant Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylketonurias Pregnancy || To investigate the BH4 response in a group of patients with phenylketonuria (PKU) in order to offer this alternative treatment to the responsive patients. The 24-h-long Phe/BH4 loading test was performed on 64 PKU patients requiring dietary treatment. All patients with mild-PKU and 75% of patients with moderate-PKU were BH4 responsive, while only 11% of classic-PKU patients showed good/partial response (P < 0.0001). The percentages of Phe decrease after the BH4 loading test were significantly different in the three PKU phenotypes (mild PKU: 67.9 +/- 18.7; moderate PKU: 37.4 +/- 16.8; and classical PKU: 21.9 +/- 13.7; ANOVA with Bonferroni correction: P < 0.0001). We report four mutations (P147S, D222G, P275S, and P362T) not previously associated with BH4 responsiveness, all of them combined with mutations with zero predicted residual activity. Both the percentage of Phe decrease and the Phe value achieved 24 h after BH4 loading are valuable data in predicting a response. We report four mutations not previously associated with BH4 responsiveness.",3 1
"PTEN mutation spectrum and genotype-phenotype correlations in Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome suggest a single entity with Cowden syndrome. || Abnormalities, Multiple Cells, Cultured Chromosome Deletion Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10 Cohort Studies Craniofacial Abnormalities Family Health Female Genetic Carrier Screening Genetic Markers Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Heterozygote Humans Intellectual Disability Male Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phenotype Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Germline mutations in the tumour suppressor gene PTEN have been implicated in two hamartoma syndromes that exhibit some clinical overlap, Cowden syndrome (CS) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRR). PTEN maps to 10q23 and encodes a dual specificity phosphatase, a substrate of which is phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate, a phospholipid in the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway. CS is characterized by multiple hamartomas and an increased risk of benign and malignant disease of the breast, thyroid and central nervous system, whilst the presence of cancer has not been formally documented in BRR. The partial clinical overlap in these two syndromes is exemplified by the hallmark features of BRR: macrocephaly and multiple lipomas, the latter of which occur in a minority of individuals with CS. Additional features observed in BRR, which may also occur in a minority of CS patients, include Hashimoto's thyroiditis, vascular malformations and mental retardation. Pigmented macules of the glans penis, delayed motor development and neonatal or infant onset are noted only in BRR. In this study, constitutive DNA samples from 43 BRR individuals comprising 16 sporadic and 27 familial cases, 11 of which were families with both CS and BRR, were screened for PTEN mutations. Mutations were identified in 26 of 43 (60%) BRR cases. Genotype-phenotype analyses within the BRR group suggested a number of correlations, including the association of PTEN mutation and cancer or breast fibroadenoma in any given CS, BRR or BRR/CS overlap family ( P = 0.014), and, in particular, truncating mutations were associated with the presence of cancer and breast fibroadenoma in a given family ( P = 0.024). Additionally, the presence of lipomas was correlated with the presence of PTEN mutation in BRR patients ( P = 0.028). In contrast to a prior report, no significant difference in mutation status was found in familial versus sporadic cases of BRR ( P = 0.113). Comparisons between BRR and a previously studied group of 37 CS families suggested an increased likelihood of identifying a germline PTEN mutation in families with either CS alone or both CS and BRR when compared with BRR alone ( P = 0.002). Among CS, BRR and BRR/CS overlap families that are PTEN mutation positive, the mutation spectra appear similar. Thus, PTEN mutation-positive CS and BRR may be different presentations of a single syndrome and, hence, both should receive equal attention with respect to cancer surveillance.",2 3
"Frequent gastrointestinal polyps and colorectal adenocarcinomas in a prospective series of PTEN mutation carriers. || Adenocarcinoma Adolescent Adult Aged Child Child, Preschool Colorectal Neoplasms Endoscopy, Gastrointestinal Female Gene Deletion Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Infant Intestinal Polyps Male Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phenotype Point Mutation Risk Factors Young Adult || Germline phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) mutations cause Cowden syndrome (CS), associated with breast and thyroid cancers. Case reports found 35%-85% of CS patients had gastrointestinal (GI) hamartomas. The association of benign and malignant GI neoplasias with CS remains debatable. Our goal is to describe the GI phenotype in a prospective series of PTEN mutation carriers. Patients who met relaxed International Cowden Consortium criteria (N = 2548) or with 5 or more GI polyps, 1 or more of which was hyperplastic or hamartomatous (N = 397), were prospectively recruited. Germline PTEN mutation/deletion analysis was performed. Of the 2945 patients, 127 (123 of 2548 and 4 of 397, respectively) patients having clear pathogenic PTEN mutations were eligible for this study. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, colonoscopy, and pathology reports were reviewed. The Fisher 2-tailed exact test, unpaired t tests, and age- and sex-adjusted standardized incidence ratio were calculated. Of 127 PTEN mutation carriers, 69 underwent 1 or more endoscopies with 64 (93%) having polyps. Of the 64, half had hyperplastic polyps. There were one to innumerable polyps in the colorectum, ileum, duodenum, stomach, and/or esophagus, with 24 subjects having both upper and lower GI polyps. Nine (13%) subjects had colorectal cancer, all younger than the age of 50. The adjusted standardized incidence ratio was 224.1 (95% confidence interval, 109.3-411.3; P < .0001). PTEN-associated CS should be considered a mixed polyp syndrome, with hyperplastic polyps most prevalent, with a risk of early onset colorectal cancer. Routine colonoscopy should be considered in PTEN-associated CS, especially in the context of hyperplastic and/or adenomatous polyps.",3 4
"Founder and recurrent CDH1 mutations in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. ||  || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer is caused by germline mutations in the epithelial cadherin (CDH1) gene and is characterized by an increased risk for diffuse gastric cancer and lobular breast cancer. To determine whether recurring germline CDH1 mutations occurred due to independent mutational events or common ancestry. Thirty-eight families diagnosed clinically with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer were accrued between November 2004 and January 2006 and were analyzed for CDH1 mutations as part of an ongoing study at the British Columbia Cancer Agency. Twenty-six families had at least 2 gastric cancer cases with 1 case of diffuse gastric cancer in a person younger than 50 years; 12 families had either a single case of diffuse gastric cancer diagnosed in a person younger than 35 years or multiple cases of diffuse gastric cancer diagnosed in persons older than 50 years. Classification of family members as carriers or noncarriers of CDH1 mutations. Haplotype analysis to assess recurring mutations for common ancestry was performed on 7 families from this study and 7 previously reported families with the same mutations. Thirteen mutations (6 novel) were identified in 15 of the 38 families (40% detection rate). The 1137G>A splicing mutation and the 1901C>T (A634V) missense/splicing mutation occurred on common haplotypes in 2 families but on different haplotypes in a third family. The 2195G>A (R732Q) missense/splicing mutation occurred in 2 families on different haplotypes. The 2064-2065delTG mutation occurred on a common haplotype in 2 families. Two families from this study plus 2 additional families carrying the novel 2398delC mutation shared a common haplotype, suggesting a founder effect. All 4 families originate from the southeast coast of Newfoundland. Due to concentrations of lobular breast cancer cases, 2 branches of this family had been diagnosed as having hereditary breast cancer and were tested for BRCA mutations. Within these 4 families, the cumulative risk by age 75 years in mutation carriers for clinically detected gastric cancer was 40% (95% confidence interval [CI], 12%-91%) for males and 63% (95% CI, 19%-99%) for females and the risk for breast cancer in female mutation carriers was 52% (95% CI, 29%-94%). Recurrent CDH1 mutations in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer are due to both independent mutational events and common ancestry. The presence of a founder mutation from Newfoundland is strongly supported.",2 4 0 3
"Pathology and function of conduction tissue in Fabry disease cardiomyopathy. || Cardiomyopathies Electrocardiography Electrophysiologic Techniques, Cardiac Fabry Disease Female Heart Atria Heart Conduction System Heart Rate Humans Male Microscopy, Electron Middle Aged Myocardium Retrospective Studies Ventricular Function || Cardiac arrhythmias are common in Fabry disease (FD) and may occur in prehypertrophic cardiomyopathy suggesting an early compromise of conduction tissue (CT). Therefore, FD X-linked and CT may be variously involved in male and female patients with FD cardiomyopathy, affecting CT function. Among 74 patients with endomyocardial biopsy diagnosis of FD cardiomyopathy, 13 (6 men; 7 women; mean age, 50.1±13.5 years; maximal wall thickness, 16.7±3.7 mm) had CT included in histological specimens and 6 also at electron microscopy. CT glycolipid infiltration was defined as focal, moderate, extensive, or massive, if involved ≤30%, ≤50%, >50%, or 100% of cells; identified as loosely arranged small myocytes positive to HCN4 immunostaining, supplied by a centrally placed thick-walled arteriole. CT involvement was correlated with age, sex, and α-Gal gene mutation. CT function was evaluated by electrophysiological study and arrhythmias at Holter registration. CT infiltration was focal/moderate in 4 women with no arrhythmias and normal electrophysiological study, extensive in 3 women with atrial or ventricular arrhythmias and short HV interval, and massive in 6 men with atrial fibrillation or ventricular arrhythmias and short HV. Short PR/AH with increased refractoriness was additionally found in 3 patients with extensive/massive CT infiltration. A male patient with the shortest HV presented infra-Hissian block during decremental atrial stimulation. There was no correlation with age, maximal wall thickness, and type of gene mutation. CT infiltration in FD cardiomyopathy is constant in men and variable in women because of skewed X-chromosome inactivation; its extensive/massive involvement causes accelerated conduction with prolonged refractoriness and electric instability.",3 4
"Angiokeratomas of Fabry successfully treated with intense pulsed light. || Adult Angiokeratoma Buttocks Fabry Disease Female Humans Microscopy, Electron Phototherapy Skin Neoplasms Thigh || Fabry disease (FD) is a rare X-linked lysosomal storage disorder resulting from the deficient activity of the enzyme alpha-galactosidase A. Angiokeratomas (AKs) are a frequent manifestation of this disease. They usually become apparent during childhood and can cause important cosmetic disability. Current treatment of this feature in the setting of FD has been mainly based on the application of laser systems, namely the argon laser, the variable pulse width 532-nm Nd:YAG laser, the 578-nm copper vapor laser and the flashlamp-pumped pulsed dye laser. We report the case of a 31-year-old Caucasian woman with a clinical and molecular (GLA p.R118C) diagnosis of FD, presenting multiple AKs scattered over the buttocks and thighs. She was treated with 10 sessions of intense pulsed light (IPL), with a 4-8-week interval between them. An almost complete clearance of the lesions was obtained, with no scars or significant complaints. No recurrence occurred during a 12-month follow-up period. The IPL source can be considered a suitable, effective and safe treatment modality for these cutaneous lesions that typically affect patients with FD, with no need for local anesthesia and with very satisfactory cosmetic results. To our best knowledge, there are no reports in the literature of Fabry's AKs treated with IPL.",3
"Acinic cell carcinoma of the retromolar trigone region: expanding the tumor phenotype in Cowden syndrome? || Adult Carcinoma, Acinar Cell DNA Mutational Analysis Genes, Tumor Suppressor Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male PTEN Phosphohydrolase Point Mutation Salivary Gland Neoplasms || Cowden syndrome (CS) is a cancer predisposition syndrome caused by germline mutations in the PTEN tumor suppressor gene. It is associated with an increased risk of thyroid, breast and endometrial cancer but many manifestations can be found in the head and neck region, some of which are pathognomonic. Here we report a 35-year-old male referred by his dentist for evaluation of a lesion located near the retromolar trigone. Comprehensive clinical examination revealed papillomatous skin lesions, macrocephaly and gingival hypertrophy. Histopathological examination of the lesion showed an acinic cell carcinoma (ACC) of minor salivary gland origin. Analysis of the PTEN gene identified a germline R130Q mutation in exon 5, confirming the diagnosis of CS, but no loss of heterozygosity was seen in DNA extracted from tumor tissue. This is to our knowledge the first case describing an association of ACC of the minor salivary gland with a PTEN-gene related disorder. It emphasizes the importance of head and neck examination in these patients.",3
"Mutation spectrum of phenylketonuria in Iranian population. || Base Sequence Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Iran Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic || Identification of molecular basis of phenylketonuria (PKU) in Iran has been accomplished through the analysis of 248 unrelated chromosomes from 124 Iranian classic PKU subjects. Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene mutations were analyzed through a combined approach in which p.S67P, p.R252W, p.R261Q, p.R261X, p.L333F, IVS10-11G>A, IVS11+1G>C, p.L364del, p.R408Q and p.R408W mutations were first screened by PCR of PAH gene exons 3, 7, 10, 11 and 12, followed by digestion with the appropriate digestion enzymes. Subsequently SSCP analysis for exons 2, 6, 7 and 11 of the PAH gene and finally, sequencing of 13 PAH gene exons have been used to study uncharacterized PKU chromosomes. 26 different mutations were found. The predominant mutation in this population sample was IVS10-11G>A, with a frequency of 24.6%. Nine mutations (IVS10-11G>A, p.R261Q, p.P281L, IVS11+1G>C, p.K363>NFS, p.R243X, IVS2+5G>C, p.R261X and p.R252W) represent almost 84% of all PKU chromosomes studied. IVS10-11G>A mutation is the major PKU-causing mutation throughout the Mediterranean region. The finding of the high prevalence of this mutation in Iranian population is consistent with the historical and geographical links between Iranian and Mediterranean populations.",3
"Phenylketonuria mutations and their relation to RFLP haplotypes at the PAH locus in Czech PKU families. || Base Sequence Czech Republic DNA Mutational Analysis Genotype Haplotypes Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length || A detailed study of the mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene from the eastern part of the Czech Republic (Moravia) is reported. A total of 190 mutant alleles from 95 phenylketonuria (PKU) families were analyzed for 21 prevalent Caucasian mutations and restriction fragment length polymorphism/variable number of tandem repeats (RFLP/VNTR) haplotypes. Eighty per cent of all mutant alleles were found to carry 11 mutations. The most common molecular defect was the mutation R408W (55.3%), with a very high degree of homozygosity (34.6%). Each of four other mutations (R158Q, R243X, G272X, IVS12nt1) accounted for more than 3% of PKU alleles. Rarely present were mutations IVS10nt546 (2.6%), R252W (2.6%), L48S (2.1%), R261Q (1.6%), Y414C (1.0%) and 165T (0.5%). Mutations that have been predominantly described in southern Europe (IVS7nt1, A259V, Y277D, R241H, T278N) were not detected. A total of 14 different mutant haplotypes were observed. Three unusual genotype-haplotype associations were identified (R158Q on haplotypes 2.3 and 7.8 and R252W on haplotype 69.3). There was a strong association between the mutation R408W and haplotype 2.3 (54.7%). Heterogeneity was found at mutations R408W (haplotypes 2.3 and 5.9), R158Q (haplotypes 4.3, 2.3 and 7.8) and IVS10nt546 (haplotypes 6.7 and 34.7). The molecular basis of PKU in the Moravian area appears to be relatively homogeneous in comparison with other southern and western European populations, thus providing a good starting point for prenatal diagnosis and early clinical classification.",3
"Biopterin responsive phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. There have been more than 400 mutations identified in the PAH gene leading to variable degrees of deficiency in PAH activity, and consequently a wide spectrum of clinical severity. A pilot study was undertaken to examine the response to 6-R-l-erythro-5,6,7,8-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) in patients with atypical and classical PKU. PAH gene mutation analysis was performed using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and gene sequencing. Patients with classical, atypical, or mild PKU were orally given BH4 10 mg/kg. Blood phenylalanine and tyrosine levels were determined using tandem MS/MS at 0 hours, 4 hours, 8 hours, and 24 hours intervals. Thirty-six patients were given a single oral dose of 10 mg/kg of BH4. Twenty one patients (58.33%) responded with a decrease in blood phenylalanine level. Of the patients that responded, 12 were classical, 7 atypical, and 2 mild. The mean decline in blood phenylalanine at 24 hours was > 30% of baseline. There were 15 patients who did not respond to the BH4 challenge, 14 of those had classical and one had atypical PKU. Mapping the mutations that responded to BH4 on the PAH enzyme showed that mutations were in the catalytic, regulatory, oligomerization, and BH4 binding domains. Five patients responding to BH4 had mutations not previously identified. The data presented suggest higher than anticipated number of PKU mutations respond to BH4, and such mutations are on all the domains of PAH.",3 1
"Phenylketonuria in Italy: distinct distribution pattern of three mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by the deficiency of a liver-specific enzyme, phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). The pattern of PAH mutations in Mediterranean populations appears to be different from that observed in northern Europe and Asia. Our aim was to study the molecular basis of PKU in Campania and Calabria, two regions of southern Italy. We studied 99 unrelated alleles, detecting 75.8% of the mutations. Our results show that 57% of all the PKU alleles are caused by three different mutations: IVS10nt-546, R261Q and L48S, which display significant differences in their relative distribution across Italy. A novel mutation, a G-to-T transversion at the codon 257 (G257C), was also identified. This mutation results in a Gly-to-Cys change in the catalytic domain of the protein.",3 1
"A common ancestor for COCH related cochleovestibular (DFNA9) patients in Belgium and The Netherlands bearing the P51S mutation. || Alleles Amino Acid Substitution Belgium Chromosomes, Artificial, Yeast Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 Cochlear Diseases Contig Mapping Extracellular Matrix Proteins Family Health Female Gene Frequency Haplotypes Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Microsatellite Repeats Netherlands Point Mutation Proteins Vestibular Diseases || ",3 4
"KLLN epigenotype-phenotype associations in Cowden syndrome. || DNA Methylation Epigenesis, Genetic Female Genetic Association Studies Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Promoter Regions, Genetic Thyroid Neoplasms Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Germline KLLN promoter hypermethylation was recently identified as a potential genetic etiology of the cancer predisposition syndrome, Cowden syndrome (CS), when no causal PTEN gene mutation was found. We screened for KLLN promoter methylation in a large prospective series of CS patients and determined the risk of benign and malignant CS features in patients with increased methylation both with and without a PTEN mutation/variant of unknown significance. In all, 1012 CS patients meeting relaxed International Cowden Consortium criteria including 261 PTEN mutation-positive CS patients, 187 PTEN variant-positive CS patients and 564 PTEN mutation-negative CS patients, as well as 111 population controls were assessed for germline KLLN promoter methylation by MassARRAY EpiTYPER analysis. KLLN promoter methylation was analyzed both as a continuous and a dichotomous variable in the calculation of phenotypic risks by stepwise logistic regression and Kaplan-Meier/standardized incidence ratio methods, respectively. Significantly increased KLLN promoter methylation was seen in CS individuals with and without a PTEN mutation/VUS compared with controls (P<0.001). Patients with high KLLN promoter methylation have increased risks of all CS-associated malignancies compared with the general population. Interestingly, KLLN-associated risk of thyroid cancer appears to be gender and PTEN status dependent. KLLN promoter methylation associated with different benign phenotypes dependent on PTEN status. Furthermore, increasing KLLN promoter methylation is associated with a greater phenotype burden in mutation-negative CS patients. Germline promoter hypermethylation of KLLN is associated with particular malignant and benign CS features, which is dependent on the PTEN mutation status.",3 4
"Questioning the Pathogenic Role of the GLA p.Ala143Thr ""Mutation"" in Fabry Disease: Implications for Screening Studies and ERT. ||  || Fabry disease is an X-linked inborn error of glycosphingolipid metabolism caused by quantitative or qualitative defects in the lysosomal enzyme alfa-Galactosidase A (aGAL A), ultimately resulting in vital organ dysfunction. Mainly the kidneys, the heart, and the central nervous system are involved. While the classical phenotype of Fabry disease is readily recognizable, screening studies have identified clinical variants. Here, we report the phenotype associated with the GLA p.Ala143Thr (c.427G>A) mutation in 12 patients aged 42-83 years. None of the patients had classical Fabry signs or symptoms as angiokeratoma, hypohidrosis, acroparesthesia, or cornea verticillata. Possible Fabry manifestations were renal failure (5/12), stroke (7/12), and left ventricular hypertrophy (5/12), but these were not necessarily attributable to the p.Ala143Thr mutation, as a cardiac biopsy in one female and left ventricular hypertrophy and kidney biopsies in two males with renal failure and microalbuminuria lacked Gb-3 deposits. The literature data on this mutation as well as data collected in the Fabry Outcome Survey (FOS) database confirm these findings. The association of renal failure, stroke, and left ventricular hypertrophy with this mutation could be the result of selection bias, as most patients were detected in screening studies.We conclude that care should be taken with attribution of vital organ dysfunction to GLA sequence alterations. In case of the p.Ala143Thr mutation, and possibly also other mutations associated with an attenuated phenotype, diagnostic tools such as biopsy and imaging should critically evaluate the relation of end-organ failure with Fabry disease, as this has important consequences for enzyme replacement therapy.",3
Pompe disease presenting as an isolated generalized dilative arteriopathy with repeated brain and kidney infarcts. || Arteries Brain Infarction Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Kidney Diseases Male Middle Aged Vascular Diseases alpha-Glucosidases || ,3 1 4
"A molecular survey of phenylketonuria in Iceland: identification of a founding mutation and evidence of predominant Norse settlement. || DNA Mutational Analysis Founder Effect Frameshift Mutation Gene Frequency Gene Pool Haplotypes Humans Iceland Maps as Topic Pedigree Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Sequence Analysis, DNA || Iceland was settled during the late 9th and early 10th centuries AD by Vikings who arrived from Norway and the British Isles. Although it is generally acknowledged that the Vikings brought with them Celtic slaves, the relative contribution of these peoples to the modern Icelandic gene pool has been a matter of considerable discussion. Most population genetic studies using classical markers have indicated a large Irish genetic contribution. We have investigated the molecular basis of phenylketonuria (PKU) in 17 Icelandic patients and found 9 different mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. One novel mutation, Y377fsdelT, accounts for more than 40% of the mutant chromosomes. Haplotype data support a common ancestral origin of the mutation, and genealogical examination extending back more than 5 generations shows that this mutation has probably arisen in an isolated part of southern Iceland and was enriched by a founder effect. At least 7 PKU mutations have originated outside iceland. The almost exclusively Scandinavian background of these mutations and the complete absence of common Irish PKU mutations strongly support historical and linguistic evidence of a predominant Scandinavian heritage of the Icelandic people.",3
"Molecular heterogeneity of nonphenylketonuria hyperphenylalaninemia in 25 Danish patients. || Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Base Sequence Codon DNA Denmark Exons Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Introns Mass Screening Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Point Mutation || ",2 1 3
"Molecular epidemiology and BH4-responsiveness in patients with phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency from Galicia region of Spain. || Adolescent Adult Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Female Gene Frequency Genetic Association Studies Humans Male Molecular Epidemiology Mutation Pedigree Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Spain Young Adult || Knowledge of hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) mutational spectrum in a population allows in many cases an accurate prediction of the phenotype and tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) responsiveness, thus selecting an adequate treatment. In this work, we have performed the molecular characterization of 105 HPA patients from Galicia, in the northwest region of Spain, evaluating their phenotype and BH4 response. The mutational spectrum analysis showed 47 distinct mutations in 89 families, 37 of them (78.7%) corresponding to missense mutations. Six mutations account for 47.2% of all the investigated alleles, each one with a frequency ≥ 5% (IVS10-11G>A, p.R261Q, p.V388M, p.R176L, p.E280K, p.A300S). The most prevalent HPA mutations in Galicia are the common Mediterranean mutation IVS10-11G>A and p.R261Q, with frequencies of 13.8% and 10.5%, respectively. One novel mutation (p.K361Q; c.1081A>C) was also reported. Although a good genotype-phenotype correlation is observed, there is no exact correlation for some genotypes involving mutations p.R261Q, p.I65T or IVS10-11G>A. Forty seven patients were monitored for post-challenge BH4, establishing genotype-based predictions of BH4-responsiveness in all of them. All phenylketonuric patients with 2 nonresponsive mutations were unresponsive to BH4 and patients with mutations previously associated with BH4 responsiveness in the two alleles had a clear positive response to the test, with the exception of 5 patients with mutations p.R261Q, p.I65T and p.R68S. Our study supports a similar degree of heterogeneity of the HPA mutation spectrum in Galicia compared to reported data from Southern Europe. Patients carrying null mutations in both alleles showed the highest degree of concordance with the most severe phenotypes. Genotype is a good predictor of BH4 response.",3 1
"Targeted population screening of late onset Pompe disease in unspecified myopathy patients for Korean population. || Adult Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Muscular Diseases Prospective Studies Republic of Korea alpha-Glucosidases || We performed targeted population screening of late onset Pompe disease (LOPD) in unspecified myopathy patients, because early diagnosis is difficult due to its heterogeneous clinical features. We prospectively enrolled 90 unrelated myopathic patients who had one or more signs out of five LOPD-like clinical findings (proximal weakness, axial weakness, lingual weakness, respiratory difficulty, idiopathic hyperCKemia). Acid alpha glucosidase activity was evaluated with dried blood spot and mixed leukocyte simultaneously. For a final diagnosis of LOPD, 16 patients with decreased enzyme activity were genotyped by GAA molecular analysis. We found two patients with LOPD (2.2%), and the remaining 14 patients had at least one G576S or E689K mutation, known as the pseudodeficiency allele. Acid alpha glucosidase activity of LOPD patients was significantly lower than that of patients with at least one pseudodeficiency allele (p = 0.017). This study is the first LOPD screening study for targeted Korean population, and more generally, an Asian population. Our findings suggest that for diagnosis of LOPD in Asian population, modified cutoff value of acid alpha glucosidase activity with dry blood spot considering that of patients having heterozygote pathogenic variants or pseudodeficiency alleles may reduce time and cost requirements and increase the comfort of patients.",3 1
"Novel GAA sequence variant c.1211 A>G reduces enzyme activity but not protein expression in infantile and adult onset Pompe disease. || Age of Onset Case-Control Studies Female Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II HEK293 Cells Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Mutation Mutation, Missense Pedigree Phenotype Pregnancy Quadriceps Muscle RNA Splicing Reference Values || Pompe disease is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous autosomal recessive disorder caused by lysosomal acid α-glucosidase (GAA) deficiency. We report on two affected members of a non-consanguineous Caucasian family, including a classical infantile-onset patient with severe cardiomyopathy (IO) and his paternal grandmother with the adult-onset (AO) form. Two compound heterozygous sequence variants of the GAA gene were identified in each patient by mutation analyses (IO=c.1211A>G and c.1798C>T; AO=c.1211A>G and c.692+5G>T). For this study, the biochemical phenotype resulting from the missense mutation c.1211A>G in exon 8, which converts a highly conserved aspartate to glycine (p.Asp404Gly), was of specific interest because it had not been reported previously. Western blotting revealed a robust expression of all GAA isoforms in quadriceps muscle of both patients (fully CRIM positive), while enzymatic activity was 3.6% (IO) and 6.6% (AO) of normal controls. To further validate these findings, the c.1211A>G sequence variant was introduced in wild type GAA cDNA and over-expressed in HEK293T cells. Site-directed mutagenesis analyses confirmed that the mutation does not affect processing or expression of GAA protein, but rather impairs enzyme function. Similar results were reported for c.1798C>T (p.Arg600Cys), which further supports the biochemical phenotype observed in IO. The third mutation (c.692+5G>T, in intron 3) was predicted to affect normal splicing of the GAA mRNA, and qPCR indeed verified a 4-fold lower mRNA expression in AO. It is concluded that the novel sequence variant c.1211A>G results in full CRIM but significantly lower GAA activity, which in combination with c.1798C>T leads to infantile-onset Pompe disease. We surmise that the difference in disease severity between the two family members in this study is due to a milder effect of the intronic mutation c.692+5G>T (vs. c.1798C>T) on phenotype, partially preserving GAA activity and delaying onset in the proband (paternal grandmother).",3 1 0
"Germline PTEN mutations in Cowden syndrome-like families. || Female Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Polymorphism, Genetic Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Cowden syndrome (CS) or multiple hamartoma syndrome (MIM 158350) is an autosomal dominant disorder with an increased risk for breast and thyroid carcinoma. The diagnosis of CS, as operationally defined by the International Cowden Consortium, is made when a patient, or family, has a combination of pathognomonic major and/or minor criteria. The CS gene has recently been identified as PTEN, which maps at 10q23.3 and encodes a dual specificity phosphatase. PTEN appears to function as a tumour suppressor in CS, with between 13-80% of CS families harbouring germline nonsense, missense, and frameshift mutations predicted to disrupt normal PTEN function. To date, only a small number of tumour suppressor genes, including BRCA1, BRCA2, and p53, have been associated with familial breast or breast/ovarian cancer families. Given the involvement of PTEN in CS, we postulated that PTEN was a likely candidate to play a role in families with a ""CS-like"" phenotype, but not classical CS. To answer these questions, we gathered a series of patients from families who had features reminiscent of CS but did not meet the Consortium Criteria. Using a combination of denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), temporal temperature gel electrophoresis (TTGE), and sequence analysis, we screened 64 unrelated CS-like subjects for germline mutations in PTEN. A single male with follicular thyroid carcinoma from one of these 64 (2%) CS-like families harboured a germline point mutation, c.209T-->C. This mutation occurred at the last nucleotide of exon 3 and within a region homologous to the cytoskeletal proteins tensin and auxilin. We conclude that germline PTEN mutations play a relatively minor role in CS-like families. In addition, our data would suggest that, for the most part, the strict International Cowden Consortium operational diagnostic criteria for CS are quite robust and should remain in place.",3
"Mutation spectrum of six genes in Chinese phenylketonuria patients obtained through next-generation sequencing. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Biopterin China Computational Biology DNA Mutational Analysis High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans INDEL Mutation Multiplex Polymerase Chain Reaction Mutation Pedigree Phenylketonurias || The identification of gene variants plays an important role in the diagnosis of genetic diseases. To develop a rapid method for the diagnosis of phenylketonuria (PKU) and tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) deficiency, we designed a multiplex, PCR-based primer panel to amplify all the exons and flanking regions (50 bp average) of six PKU-associated genes (PAH, PTS, GCH1, QDPR, PCBD1 and GFRP). The Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM) System was used to detect mutations in all the exons of these six genes. We tested 93 DNA samples from blood specimens from 35 patients and their parents (32 families) and 26 healthy adults. Using strict bioinformatic criteria, this sequencing data provided, on average, 99.14% coverage of the 39 exons at more than 70-fold mean depth of coverage. We found 23 previously documented variants in the PAH gene and six novel mutations in the PAH and PTS genes. A detailed analysis of the mutation spectrum of these patients is described in this study. These results were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. In conclusion, benchtop next-generation sequencing technology can be used to detect mutations in monogenic diseases and can detect both point mutations and indels with high sensitivity, fidelity and throughput at a lower cost than conventional methods in clinical applications.",2 1 3
"PDZD7 is a modifier of retinal disease and a contributor to digenic Usher syndrome. || Frameshift Mutation Genotype Hearing Loss Homozygote Humans Male Mutation Phenotype Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled Retinitis Pigmentosa Siblings Syndrome Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous recessive disease characterized by hearing loss and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). It frequently presents with unexplained, often intrafamilial, variability of the visual phenotype. Although 9 genes have been linked with Usher syndrome, many patients do not have mutations in any of these genes, suggesting that there are still unidentified genes involved in the syndrome. Here, we have determined that mutations in PDZ domain-containing 7 (PDZD7), which encodes a homolog of proteins mutated in Usher syndrome subtype 1C (USH1C) and USH2D, contribute to Usher syndrome. Mutations in PDZD7 were identified only in patients with mutations in other known Usher genes. In a set of sisters, each with a homozygous mutation in USH2A, a frame-shift mutation in PDZD7 was present in the sister with more severe RP and earlier disease onset. Further, heterozygous PDZD7 mutations were present in patients with truncating mutations in USH2A, G protein-coupled receptor 98 (GPR98; also known as USH2C), and an unidentified locus. We validated the human genotypes using zebrafish, and our findings were consistent with digenic inheritance of PDZD7 and GPR98, and with PDZD7 as a retinal disease modifier in patients with USH2A. Pdzd7 knockdown produced an Usher-like phenotype in zebrafish, exacerbated retinal cell death in combination with ush2a or gpr98, and reduced Gpr98 localization in the region of the photoreceptor connecting cilium. Our data challenge the view of Usher syndrome as a traditional Mendelian disorder and support the reclassification of Usher syndrome as an oligogenic disease.",2 1 3
"Cowden syndrome and Bannayan Riley Ruvalcaba syndrome represent one condition with variable expression and age-related penetrance: results of a clinical study of PTEN mutation carriers. || Adolescent Adult Age Factors Aged Child Child, Preschool Exons Female Genetic Heterogeneity Genotype Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Penetrance Phenotype Syndrome Terminology as Topic || The most commonly reported phenotypes described in patients with PTEN mutations are Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS), with childhood onset, macrocephaly, lipomas and developmental delay, and Cowden Syndrome (CS), an adult-onset condition recognised by mucocutaneous signs, with a risk of cancers, in particular those of the thyroid and breast. It has been suggested that BRRS and CS are the same condition, but the literature continues to separate them and seek a genotype-phenotype correlation. To study the clinical features of patients with known PTEN mutations and observe any genotype-phenotype correlation. In total, 42 people (25 probands and 17 non-probands) from 26 families of all ages with PTEN mutations were recruited through the UK clinical genetics services. A full clinical history and examination were undertaken. We were unable to demonstrate a genotype-phenotype correlation. Furthermore, our findings in a 31-year-old woman with CS and an exon 1 deletion refutes previous reports that whole exon deletions are only found in patients with a BRRS phenotype. Careful phenotyping gives further support for the suggestion that BRRS and CS are actually one condition, presenting variably at different ages, as in other tumour-suppressor disorders such as neurofibromatosis type 1. This has important counselling implications, such as advice about cancer surveillance, for children diagnosed with BRRS.",2 3
"The Molecular Bases of Phenylketonuria (PKU) in New South Wales, Australia: Mutation Profile and Correlation with Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) Responsiveness. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive inborn error of phenylalanine metabolism predominantly caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. Mutation screening was carried out in a large cohort of PKU patients from New South Wales, Australia. Pathogenic mutations were identified in 99% of the alleles screened, with the two most common mutations (p.R408W and IVS12+1G>A) accounting for 30.7% of alleles. Most individuals were compound heterozygotes for previously reported mutations, but four novel mutations (c.163+1G>T, c.164-2A>G, c.461A>T [p.Y154F], and c.510-1G>A) and a novel polymorphism (c.60+62C>T) were also identified. A number of patients have been previously tested for their response to dietary supplementation of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), the cofactor of PAH. Correlation between genotype and the responses revealed that although genotype is a major determinant of BH4 responsiveness, patients with the same genotype may also show disparate responses to this treatment. A clinical and biochemical evaluation should be undertaken to determine the effectiveness of PKU treatment by supplementation of BH4.",3 1
"Cowden syndrome-affected patients with PTEN promoter mutations demonstrate abnormal protein translation. || 5' Untranslated Regions Base Sequence Binding Sites Breast Neoplasms Case-Control Studies Cell Line, Tumor DNA DNA Primers Female Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple HeLa Cells Humans Luciferases Models, Molecular Nucleic Acid Conformation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Point Mutation Promoter Regions, Genetic Protein Binding Protein Biosynthesis RNA, Messenger Recombinant Proteins Syndrome Transcription Factors Transfection || Germline mutations of PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10) are associated with the multihamartomatous disorder Cowden syndrome (CS). Moreover, patients with CS with germline PTEN promoter mutations have aberrant PTEN protein expression and an increased frequency of breast cancer. Here, we examined the downstream effect of five PTEN promoter variants (-861G/T, -853C/G, -834C/T, -798G/C, and -764G/A) that are not within any known cis-acting regulatory elements. Clinically, all five of these patients have been given diagnoses of breast, thyroid, and/or endometrial cancer. We demonstrated that protein binding to the PTEN promoter (-893 to -755) was not altered in the five variants when compared with the wild-type (WT) promoter. However, reporter assays indicated that three of the variants (-861G/T, -853C/G, and -764G/A) demonstrated an ~50% decrease in luciferase activity compared with the WT construct. PTEN messenger RNA (mRNA) levels were not altered in these variants, whereas secondary structure predictions indicated that different PTEN 5' untranslated region transcript-folding patterns exist in three variants, suggesting an inhibition of protein translation. This was confirmed by PTEN protein analysis. These data indicate that variants causing large mRNA secondary structure alterations result in an inhibition of protein translation and a decrease in PTEN protein expression. These data emphasize the importance of PTEN promoter nucleotide variations and their ability to lead to CS progression by a novel regulatory mechanism. Importantly, these patients have a high prevalence of breast, thyroid, and endometrial malignancies; thus, understanding of the mechanism of PTEN dysfunction in these patients will lead to more-sensitive molecular diagnostic and predictive testing and, ultimately, to rational targeted therapies to treat or prevent malignancy.",3 0
"Germline TP53 mutations result into a constitutive defect of p53 DNA binding and transcriptional response to DNA damage. || Adolescent Adult Aged Case-Control Studies Child Child, Preschool Chromatin Immunoprecipitation DNA DNA Damage Female Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Lymphocytes Male Middle Aged Transcription, Genetic Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) results from heterozygous germline mutations of TP53, encoding a key transcriptional factor activated in response to DNA damage. We have recently shown, from a large LFS series, that dominant-negative missense mutations are the most clinically severe and, thanks to a new p53 functional assay in lymphocytes, that they alter the p53 transcriptional response to DNA damage more drastically than null mutations. In this study, we first confirmed this observation by performing the p53 functional assay in lymphocytes from 56 TP53 mutation carriers harbouring 35 distinct alterations. Then, to compare the impact of the different types of germline TP53 mutations on DNA binding, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-Seq) in lymphocytes exposed to doxorubicin. ChIP-Seq performed in wild-type TP53 control lymphocytes accurately mapped 1287 p53-binding sites. New p53-binding sites were validated using a functional assay in yeast. ChIP-Seq analysis of LFS lymphocytes carrying TP53 null mutations (p.P152Rfs*18 or complete deletion) or the low penetrant 'Brazilian' p.R337H mutation revealed a moderate decrease of p53-binding sites (949, 580 and 620, respectively) and of ChIP-Seq peak depths. In contrast, analysis of LFS lymphocytes with TP53 dominant-negative missense mutations p.R273H or p.R248W revealed only 310 and 143 p53-binding sites, respectively, and the depths of the corresponding peaks were drastically reduced. Altogether, our results show that TP53 mutation carriers exhibit a constitutive defect of the transcriptional response to DNA damage and that the clinical severity of TP53 dominant-negative missense mutations is explained by a massive and global alteration of p53 DNA binding.",3 4 0
"Clinical manifestation of late onset Pompe disease patients in Hong Kong. || Adolescent Adult Asian Continental Ancestry Group Child Female Genetic Association Studies Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Hong Kong Humans Incidence Male Young Adult || Late onset Pompe disease is a rare inherited metabolic disease with diverse clinical manifestation. However, there is a lack of local data in Hong Kong. We aimed at performing an in-depth review of natural history of all patients in Hong Kong. Eleven patients were diagnosed to have the disease in Hong Kong from 2000 to 2013. All case records were reviewed and face-to-face interviews were conducted to complete a questionnaire regarding the clinical manifestation and diagnosis of the disease. The estimated birth incidence was 1/300,000. The age of diagnosis ranged from 9 to 44 years; all patients were ethnic Chinese. The median ages of first symptoms and first medical attention were 20.5(6-44) and 29(9-44) years respectively. The most common initial complaint was decreased exercise tolerance. Two patients' first complaint was difficulty with getting up from lying position and failure to perform sit up. The mean time from first medical attention to diagnosis was 1.3 years but one patient was diagnosed 8 years later. Half of the patients sought medical attention due to progressive shortness of breath and all of them developed type 2 respiratory failure requiring ventilator support during the first admission. Two patients became chair-bound and seven patients required assisted ventilation. Late onset Pompe disease tends to have an earlier and more aggressive clinical presentation in Chinese and lower birth incidence was found in Hong Kong.",3 1
"Neonatal screening for lysosomal storage disorders: feasibility and incidence from a nationwide study in Austria. || Austria Fabry Disease Female Gaucher Disease Glucosylceramidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Incidence Infant, Newborn Lysosomal Storage Diseases Male Mutation Neonatal Screening Niemann-Pick Diseases Sphingomyelin Phosphodiesterase alpha-Galactosidase alpha-Glucosidases || The interest in neonatal screening for lysosomal storage disorders has increased substantially because of newly developed enzyme replacement therapies, the need for early diagnosis, and technical advances. We tested for Gaucher's disease, Pompe's disease, Fabry's disease, and Niemann-Pick disease types A and B in an anonymous prospective nationwide screening study that included genetic mutation analysis to assess the practicality and appropriateness of including these disorders in neonatal screening panels. Specimens from dried blood spots of 34,736 newborn babies were collected consecutively from January, 2010 to July, 2010, as part of the national routine Austrian newborn screening programme. Anonymised samples were analysed for enzyme activities of acid β-glucocerebrosidase, α-galactosidase, α-glucosidase, and acid sphingomyelinase by electrospray ionisation tandem mass spectrometry. Genetic mutation analyses were done in samples with suspected enzyme deficiency. All 34,736 samples were analysed successfully by the multiplex screening assay. Low enzyme activities were detected in 38 babies. Mutation analysis confirmed lysosomal storage disorders in 15 of them. The most frequent mutations were found for Fabry's disease (1 per 3859 births), followed by Pompe's disease (1 per 8684), and Gaucher's disease (1 per 17,368). The positive predictive values were 32% (95% CI 16-52), 80% (28-99), and 50% (7-93), respectively. Mutational analysis detected predominantly missense mutations associated with a late-onset phenotype. The combined overall proportion of infants carrying a mutation for lysosomal storage disorders was higher than expected. Neonatal screening for lysosomal storage disorders is likely to raise challenges for primary health-care providers. Furthermore, the high frequency of late-onset mutations makes lysosomal storage disorders a broad health problem beyond childhood. Austrian Ministry of Health, Family, and Women.",3
"Molecular and phenotypic abnormalities in individuals with germline heterozygous PTEN mutations and autism. || Adolescent Autism Spectrum Disorder Brain Case-Control Studies Child Female Genetic Association Studies Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Mutation, Missense PTEN Phosphohydrolase Prospective Studies Synaptic Transmission Young Adult || PTEN is a tumor suppressor associated with an inherited cancer syndrome and an important regulator of ongoing neural connectivity and plasticity. The present study examined molecular and phenotypic characteristics of individuals with germline heterozygous PTEN mutations and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (PTEN-ASD), with the aim of identifying pathophysiologic markers that specifically associate with PTEN-ASD and that may serve as targets for future treatment trials. PTEN-ASD patients (n=17) were compared with idiopathic (non-PTEN) ASD patients with (macro-ASD, n=16) and without macrocephaly (normo-ASD, n=38) and healthy controls (n=14). Group differences were evaluated for PTEN pathway protein expression levels, global and regional structural brain volumes and cortical thickness measures, neurocognition and adaptive behavior. RNA expression patterns and brain characteristics of a murine model of Pten mislocalization were used to further evaluate abnormalities observed in human PTEN-ASD patients. PTEN-ASD had a high proportion of missense mutations and showed reduced PTEN protein levels. Compared with the other groups, prominent white-matter and cognitive abnormalities were specifically associated with PTEN-ASD patients, with strong reductions in processing speed and working memory. White-matter abnormalities mediated the relationship between PTEN protein reductions and reduced cognitive ability. The Pten(m3m4) murine model had differential expression of genes related to myelination and increased corpus callosum. Processing speed and working memory deficits and white-matter abnormalities may serve as useful features that signal clinicians that PTEN is etiologic and prompting referral to genetic professionals for gene testing, genetic counseling and cancer risk management; and could reveal treatment targets in trials of treatments for PTEN-ASD.",3 4
"Reassessment of Mendelian gene pathogenicity using 7,855 cardiomyopathy cases and 60,706 reference samples. || Cardiomyopathies Computational Biology Databases, Genetic Exome Genetic Diseases, Inborn Genetic Testing Genetic Variation Genome, Human High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Mutation Whole Exome Sequencing || The accurate interpretation of variation in Mendelian disease genes has lagged behind data generation as sequencing has become increasingly accessible. Ongoing large sequencing efforts present huge interpretive challenges, but they also provide an invaluable opportunity to characterize the spectrum and importance of rare variation. We analyzed sequence data from 7,855 clinical cardiomyopathy cases and 60,706 Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) reference samples to obtain a better understanding of genetic variation in a representative autosomal dominant disorder. We found that in some genes previously reported as important causes of a given cardiomyopathy, rare variation is not clinically informative because there is an unacceptably high likelihood of false-positive interpretation. By contrast, in other genes, we find that diagnostic laboratories may be overly conservative when assessing variant pathogenicity. We outline improved analytical approaches that evaluate which genes and variant classes are interpretable and propose that these will increase the clinical utility of testing across a range of Mendelian diseases.Genet Med 19 2, 192-203.",3 1 4
"Mutation and haplotype analysis of phenylalanine hydroxylase alleles in classical PKU patients from the Czech Republic: identification of four novel mutations. || Alleles Czech Republic DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Markers Genotype Haplotypes Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic || Mutations, haplotypes, and other polymorphic markers in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene were analysed in 133 unrelated Czech families with classical phenylketonuria (PKU). Almost 95% of all mutant alleles were identified, using a combination of PCR and restriction analysis, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), and sequencing. A total of 30 different mutations, 16 various RFLP/VNTR haplotypes, and four polymorphisms were detected on 266 independent mutant chromosomes. The most common molecular defect observed in the Czech population was R408W (54.9%). Each of the other 29 mutations was present in no more than 5% of alleles and 13 mutations were found in only one PKU allele each (0.4%). Four novel mutations G239A, R270fsdel5bp, A342P, and IVS11nt-8g-->a were identified. In 14 (5.1%) alleles, linked to four different RFLP/VNTR haplotypes, the sequence alterations still remain unknown. Our results confirm that PKU is a heterogeneous disorder at the molecular level. Since there is evidence for the gene flow coming from northern, western, and southern parts of Europe into our Slavic population, it is clear that human migration has been the most important factor in the spread of PKU alleles in Europe.",3
"Abnormal distribution and hyperplasia of thyroid C-cells in PTEN-associated tumor syndromes. || Adenocarcinoma, Follicular Adenoma Adolescent Adult Calcitonin Child Diagnosis, Differential Female Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Hyperplasia Immunohistochemistry Male Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Thyroid Gland Thyroid Neoplasms Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Cowden's disease (CD) and Bannayan-Ruvalcaba-Riley syndrome (BRRS) are allelic disorders characterized by multiple hamartomatous overgrowths of the thyroid, breast, skin, and gastrointestinal tract, and an increased risk of developing benign and malignant tumors of the breast and thyroid gland, secondary to germline point mutations in the PTEN gene. In contrast to thyroid epithelial lesions, abnormalities of the C-cells are currently not considered part of the spectrum of manifestations seen in PTEN-associated syndromes. The thyroid glands from two patients with overlapping CD/BRRS phenotypes, and with distinct PTEN mutations, were entirely submitted for histopathological examination, calcitonin immunostaining and C-cell mapping. Multiple follicular adenomas and adenomatous nodules were present in the thyroid glands from both patients. A microscopic focus of papillary carcinoma was also present in one gland. C-cell hyperplasia was documented in both cases by calcitonin immunostaining. PTEN-associated tumor syndromes should be considered in the differential diagnosis of C-cell hyperplasia of the thyroid.",3
"Phenylketonuria mutations in Germany. || Exons Genetic Variation Germany Humans Introns Minisatellite Repeats Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Point Mutation Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Sequence Deletion Turkey || We report the spectrum of mutations and associated modified haplotypes in patients with phenylketonuria living in Germany. A total of 546 independent alleles was investigated, including 411 of German and 65 of Turkish descent. Mutations were identified for 535 PKU alleles (98%) and there were 91 different mutations. The most common mutation was R408W on 22% of alleles. Two mutations, IVS12+1G-->A and IVS10-11G-->A accounted for just under 10% of alleles, whereas the remaining mutations were found at relative frequencies of 6% or less; 43 mutations were observed once only. IVS10-11G-->A was the most common mutation (38% of alleles) in the subgroup of patients of Turkish descent. Modified haplotypes were determined from the analysis of four silent mutations, three diallelic restriction fragment length polymorphisms, a variable number of tandem repeats minisatellite and a short tandem repeat microsatellite in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene, showing that a considerable proportion of mutations must have recurred in independent founders; other mutations may have changed chromosomal haplotype backgrounds by gene conversion. The spectrum of PKU mutations in Germany reflects the history of a heterogenous Central European population living at the crossroads of migration throughout the centuries.",3
"Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Mexico: genotype-phenotype correlations, BH4 responsiveness and evidence of a founder effect. || Biopterin Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Founder Effect Genetic Association Studies Haplotypes Humans Mexico Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Treatment Outcome || The mutational spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) in Mexico is unknown, although it has been suggested that PKU variants could have a differential geographical distribution. Genotype-phenotype correlations and genotype-based predictions of responsiveness to tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4 ) have never been performed. We sequenced the PAH gene and determined the geographic origin of each allele, mini-haplotype associated, genotype-phenotype correlations and genotype-based prediction of BH4 responsiveness in 48 Mexican patients. The mutational spectrum included 34 variants with c.60+5G>T being the most frequent (20.8%) and linked to haplotype 4.3 possibly because of a founder effect and/or genetic drift. Two new variants were found c.1A>T and c.969+6T>C. The genotype-phenotype correlation was concordant in 70.8%. The genotype-based prediction to BH4 -responsiveness was 41.7%, this information could be useful for the rational selection of candidates for BH4 testing and therapy.",3 1
"Genotype and phenotype in Fabry disease: analysis of the Fabry Outcome Survey. ||  || Mutations of the gene (GLA) encoding alpha-galactosidase A are implicated in Fabry disease, a progressive, X-chromosomal inherited lysosomal storage disorder. FOS--the Fabry Outcome Survey - was established as a long-term surveillance study to describe the natural course of Fabry disease and its response to enzyme replacement therapy in a large cohort of European patients. Clinical phenotype, age of onset and course of Fabry disease are very variable, even within the same family, which makes it difficult to define a genotype-phenotype relationship by analysing individual patients. The FOS database contains detailed medical information on a large cohort of patients and thus has the potential to provide important information to address this question. At the time of analysis, information on 545 patients belonging to 157 families from nine European countries had been entered into the FOS database. A GLA mutation has been reported in 365 individuals (65% and 68% of all males and females, respectively) in FOS. These data were used to analyse the relationship between genotype and phenotype in Fabry disease. A highly significant positive correlation was found between the age at entry into FOS and the FOS Severity Index in male patients with GLA missense mutations (p < 0.001) as well as in those carrying other types of mutations (p < 0.001). A positive correlation was also found between the age at entry into FOS and the number of affected organs in male patients with missense mutations, irrespective of whether the change in the amino acid side chain predicted in the alpha-galactosidase A protein was classified as a conservative or non-conservative change. The data presented here suggest that there is a correlation between genotype and clinical severity.",3
"Novel mutation identified in Cowden syndrome presenting as a gastric adenocarcinoma. || Adenocarcinoma Amino Acid Substitution Exons Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense PTEN Phosphohydrolase Stomach Neoplasms || ",3
"Tetrahydrobiopterin as an alternative treatment for mild phenylketonuria. || Adolescent Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Molecular Conformation Mutation, Missense Oxidation-Reduction Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Prospective Studies || Hyperphenylalaninemia is a common inherited metabolic disease that is due to phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency, and at least half the affected patients have mild clinical phenotypes. Treatment with a low-phenylalanine diet represents a substantial psychosocial burden, but alternative treatments have not been effective. To explore the therapeutic efficacy of tetrahydrobiopterin, we performed a combined phenylalanine-tetrahydrobiopterin loading test and analyzed the in vivo rates of [13C]phenylalanine oxidation in 38 children with phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency (age range, 1 day to 17 years). We assessed whether responsiveness to tetrahydrobiopterin was associated with specific genotypes, and we mapped mutations using a structural model of the phenylalanine hydroxylase monomer. In 27 (87 percent) of 31 patients with mild hyperphenylalaninemia (10 patients) or mild phenylketonuria (21 patients), tetrahydrobiopterin significantly lowered blood phenylalanine levels. Phenylalanine oxidation was significantly enhanced in 23 of these 31 patients (74 percent). Conversely, none of the seven patients with classic phenylketonuria had a response to tetrahydrobiopterin as defined in this study. Long-term treatment with tetrahydrobiopterin in five children increased daily phenylalanine tolerance, allowing them to discontinue their restricted diets. Seven mutations (P314S, Y417H, V177M, V245A, A300S, E390G, and IVS4-5C-->G) were classified as probably associated with responsiveness to tetrahydrobiopterin, and six mutations (A403V, F39L, D415N, S310Y, R158Q, and I65T) were classified as potentially associated. Four mutations (Y414C, L48S, R261Q, and I65V) were inconsistently associated with this phenotype. Mutations connected to tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness were predominantly in the catalytic domain of the protein and were not directly involved in cofactor binding. Tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness is common in patients with mild hyperphenylalaninemia phenotypes. Responsiveness cannot consistently be predicted on the basis of genotype, particularly in compound heterozygotes.",3 1
"Non-phenylketonuria hyperphenylalaninaemia in Northern Ireland: frequent mutation allows screening and early diagnosis. ||  || Up to 10% of newborn children with a positive Guthrie test have non-phenylketonuria hyperphenylalaninaemia, i.e., mild elevation of serum phenylalanine that does not require dietary treatment. Depending on the relative frequencies of different phenylalanine hydroxylase mutations in a particular population, non-PKU HPA is usually caused by the combined effect of a mild HPA mutation and a severe PKU mutation. Presented here is a comprehensive analysis of non-PKU HPA in Northern Ireland. Of particular interest is one prevalent HPA mutation (T380M), which is present in over 70% of non-PKU HPA patients in Northern Ireland. Screening for this mutation is easy and inexpensive and can help confirm the diagnosis of non-PKU hyperphenylalaninaemia in the majority of cases at a very early stage. This may be clinically useful and reassuring for the parents. Other mutations described are V245A, L194P, and E390G.",3 1
"Late-onset pompe disease in Iran: A clinical and genetic report. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool Consanguinity Electromyography Evoked Potentials, Motor Family Health Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Iran Male Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal Mutation Respiration Disorders Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is characterized by absence or deficiency of acid α-glucosidase, and several causative mutations are known. In this study we report clinical and laboratory data in Iranian patients with late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD), focusing on population-specific mutations. Clinical and laboratory data of 14 patients from 10 families with the diagnosis of LOPD were recorded. All had reduced enzyme activity on dried blood spot (DBS) analysis. Genetic investigation was performed to identify the underlying mutations. The age of onset ranged from <2 to 38 years. The clinical presentations were heterogeneous. Two siblings presented with foot drop. The most common mutation was c.(-32-13T>G). There were 4 novel mutations: c.(2040 + 2dup); c.(1650delG); c.(1837T>G); and c.(2596delG). This is a comprehensive report of LOPD in Iranian patients. Distinct phenotypic and genotypic features in this population are highlighted. Muscle Nerve 55: 835-840, 2017.",3 1
"Genotype-phenotype correlations analysis of mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. || Amino Acid Sequence Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence Genotype Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Sequence Deletion || The aims of our research were to define the genotype-phenotype correlations of mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene that cause phenylketonuria (PKU) among the Israeli population. The mutation spectrum of the PAH gene in PKU patients in Israel is described, along with a discussion on genotype-phenotype correlations. By using polymerase chain reaction/denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (PCR/dHPLC) and DNA sequencing, we screened all exons of the PAH gene in 180 unrelated patients with four different PKU phenotypes [classic PKU, moderate PKU, mild PKU, and mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP)]. In 63.2% of patient genotypes, the metabolic phenotype could be predicted, though evidence is also found for both phenotypic inconsistencies among subjects with more than one type of mutation in the PAH gene. Data analysis revealed that about 25% of patients could participate in the future in (6R)-L: -erythro-5, 6, 7, 8-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) treatment trials according to their mutation genotypes. This study enables us to construct a national database in Israel that will serve as a valuable tool for genetic counseling and a prognostic evaluation of future cases of PKU.",3 1
"Phenylketonuria in The Netherlands: 93% of the mutations are detected by single-strand conformation analysis. ||  || Single-strand conformational analysis was used to screen for genetic defects in all thirteen exons of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) in phenylketonuria and hyperphenylalaninemia patients in the Netherlands. Exons that showed a bandshift were sequenced directly. In this way, we were able to identify 93% of the PAH mutations in a panel of 34 patients. Twenty-one different mutations were found: 4 of these gene aberrations are novel.",3 1
"Germline mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in children with osteosarcoma. ||  || We investigated the possibility that a significant proportion of children with osteosarcoma harbor germline mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene and, therefore, this subgroup of pediatric cancer patients should be considered for large-scale predictive testing. Genomic DNA extracted from peripheral-blood leukocytes from 235 unselected children with osteosarcoma from 33 institutions were screened for the presence of germline p53 mutations using constant denaturant gel electrophoresis (CDGE). Exons 5 through 8 were evaluated in all patients and exon 2 and exon 9 were analyzed in 59 and 95 patients, respectively. Those samples that showed aberrant migration on CDGE were sequenced or analyzed by restriction enzyme digestion of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products to confirm the nature of the gene alteration. In 18 samples, CDGE showed fragments of the p53 gene with altered electrophoretic mobilities compared with wild-type p53. DNA sequencing showed that 11 samples had an identical, previously described polymorphism. The other seven contained heterozygous p53 mutations located in exon 5 (n = 3), exon 6 (n = 1), exon 7 (n = 1), and exon 8 (n = 2). Six alterations were missense mutations and one was a nonsense mutation. Three of these patients had first-degree relatives with cancer. One of these three kindreds had a family history consistent with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). We identified germline p53 mutations in seven of 235 (3.0%) children with osteosarcoma. Four of these mutations were found in patients who did not have first-degree relatives with cancer. Although genetic transmission of the altered p53 gene could not be tested in this survey because of how it was designed, it is possible that predictive testing for p53 mutations could identify unaffected relatives of gene carriers who also have a high risk for the development of cancer. This study provides evidence for the importance of considering children with osteosarcoma for predictive testing for germline p53 mutations.",3 4
"Association of germline mutation in the PTEN tumour suppressor gene and Proteus and Proteus-like syndromes. || Genes, Tumor Suppressor Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Heterozygote Humans PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Proteus Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Proteins || The molecular aetiology of Proteus syndrome (PS) remains elusive. Germline mutations in PTEN cause Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, which are hereditary hamartoma syndromes. Some features-eg, macrocephaly, lipomatosis, and vascular malformations-can be seen in all three syndromes. We examined PTEN in patients with PS and undefined Proteus-like syndromes (PS-like) and identified de-novo germline mutations in two of nine patients with PS and three of five patients with PS-like. Germline PTEN mutation analysis should be done in individuals with PS and PS-like because of its association with increased risk of cancer development and potential of germline-mutation transmission.",3
"Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer Syndrome: CDH1 Mutations and Beyond. ||  || E-cadherin (CDH1) is a cancer predisposition gene mutated in families meeting clinically defined hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). Reliable estimates of cancer risk and spectrum in germline mutation carriers are essential for management. For families without CDH1 mutations, genetic-based risk stratification has not been possible, resulting in limited clinical options. To derive accurate estimates of gastric and breast cancer risks in CDH1 mutation carriers and determine if germline mutations in other genes are associated with HDGC. Testing for CDH1 germline mutations was performed on 183 index cases meeting clinical criteria for HDGC. Penetrance was derived from 75 mutation-positive families from within this and other cohorts, comprising 3858 probands (353 with gastric cancer and 89 with breast cancer). Germline DNA from 144 HDGC probands lacking CDH1 mutations was screened using multiplexed targeted sequencing for 55 cancer-associated genes. Accurate estimates of gastric and breast cancer risks in CDH1 mutation carriers and the relative contribution of other cancer predisposition genes in familial gastric cancers. Thirty-one distinct pathogenic CDH1 mutations (14 novel) were identified in 34 of 183 index cases (19%). By the age of 80 years, the cumulative incidence of gastric cancer was 70% (95% CI, 59%-80%) for males and 56% (95% CI, 44%-69%) for females, and the risk of breast cancer for females was 42% (95% CI, 23%-68%). In CDH1 mutation-negative index cases, candidate mutations were identified in 16 of 144 probands (11%), including mutations within genes of high and moderate penetrance: CTNNA1, BRCA2, STK11, SDHB, PRSS1, ATM, MSR1, and PALB2. This is the largest reported series of CDH1 mutation carriers, providing more precise estimates of age-associated risks of gastric and breast cancer that will improve counseling of unaffected carriers. In HDGC families lacking CDH1 mutations, testing of CTNNA1 and other tumor suppressor genes should be considered. Clinically defined HDGC families can harbor mutations in genes (ie, BRCA2) with different clinical ramifications from CDH1. Therefore, we propose that HDGC syndrome may be best defined by mutations in CDH1 and closely related genes, rather than through clinical criteria that capture families with heterogeneous susceptibility profiles.",2 4 3
"Phenylketonuria mutation analysis in Northern Ireland: a rapid stepwise approach. ||  || We present a multistep approach for the rapid analysis of phenylketonuria (PKU) mutations. In the first step, three common mutations and a polymorphic short tandem repeat (STR) system are rapidly analyzed with a fluorescent multiplex assay. In the second step, minihaplotypes combining STR and VNTR data are used to determine rare mutations likely to be present in an investigated patient, which are then confirmed by restriction enzyme analysis. The remaining mutations are analyzed with denaturant gradient-gel electrophoresis and sequencing. The first two steps together identify both mutations in 90%-95% of PKU patients, and results can be obtained within 2 d. We have investigated 121 Northern Irish families with hyperphenylalaninemia, including virtually all patients born since 1972, and have found 34 different mutations on 241 of the 242 mutant alleles. Three mutations (R408W, I65T, and F39L) account for 57.5% of mutations, while 14 mutations occur with a frequency of 1%-6%. The present analysis system is efficient and inexpensive and is particularly well suited to routine mutation analysis in a diagnostic setting.",3 1
"High frequency of PTEN mutations in nevi and melanomas from xeroderma pigmentosum patients. || Adult DNA Mutational Analysis DNA, Neoplasm Dermoscopy Female GTP Phosphohydrolases Humans Loss of Heterozygosity Male Melanoma Membrane Proteins Middle Aged Mutation Neoplasm Proteins Neoplasms, Radiation-Induced Nevus, Pigmented Oncogenes PTEN Phosphohydrolase Precancerous Conditions Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit Skin Neoplasms Sunlight TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases Ultraviolet Rays Xeroderma Pigmentosum Young Adult || We examined nevi and melanomas in 10 xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) patients with defective DNA repair. The lesions had a lentiginous appearance with markedly increased numbers of melanocytes. Using laser capture microdissection, we performed DNA sequencing of 18 benign and atypical nevi and 75 melanomas (melanoma in situ and invasive melanomas). The nevi had a similar high frequency of PTEN mutations as melanomas [61% (11/18) versus 53% (39/73)]. Both had a very high proportion of UV-type mutations (occurring at adjacent pyrimidines) [91% (10/11) versus 92% (36/39)]. In contrast to melanomas in the general population, the frequency of BRAF mutations (11%, 7/61), NRAS mutations (21%, 13/62), and KIT mutations (21%, 6/28) in XP melanomas was lower than for PTEN. Phospho-S6 immunostaining indicated activation of the mTOR pathway in the atypical nevi and melanomas. Thus, the clinical and histological appearances and the molecular pathology of these UV-related XP nevi and melanomas were different from nevi and melanomas in the general population.",3
"Molecular characterization of familial hypercholesterolemia in Spain: identification of 39 novel and 77 recurrent mutations in LDLR. ||  || Mutations in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene cause familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), an autosomal dominant inherited disorder associated with an increased risk of premature atherosclerosis. The aim of this study was to characterize the LDLR mutations in a group of 476 apparently non-related Spanish FH patients. The promoter region and the 18 exons with their flanking intron sequences of the LDLR gene were screened by PCR-SSCP analysis and DNA sequencing. In addition, we tested for the presence of the mutation p.R3500Q in the gene coding for apolipoprotein B-100 (apo B-100). We found 77 mutations previously described, and 39 novel mutations affecting the LDLR gene: 8 missense, 5 nonsense, 15 frameshift, 5 splicing, 4 in frame, one nucleotide change in the non-coding sequence of exon 1, and one silent variant. We have identified al least one of these LDLR gene mutations in 329 subjects (69%). Four patients were homozygous, 4 patients were compound heterozygous, 48 patients were found to carry two different sequence variants in the same allele and 4 patients carried three different sequence variants in the same allele. Additionally, 4 subjects were carriers of the p.R3500Q mutation in the apo B gene. All of these findings indicate that there is a broad spectrum of mutations and sequence variants in the LDLR gene causing FH in Spain.",3 4
"Recombinant human acid [alpha]-glucosidase: major clinical benefits in infantile-onset Pompe disease. || Dose-Response Relationship, Drug Europe Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Israel Palliative Care Risk Assessment Survival Analysis Survival Rate Taiwan Terminal Care Treatment Outcome United States alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is a progressive metabolic neuromuscular disorder resulting from deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA). Infantile-onset Pompe disease is characterized by cardiomyopathy, respiratory and skeletal muscle weakness, and early death. The safety and efficacy of recombinant human (rh) GAA were evaluated in 18 patients with rapidly progressing infantile-onset Pompe disease. Patients were diagnosed at 6 months of age and younger and exhibited severe GAA deficiency and cardiomyopathy. Patients received IV infusions of rhGAA at 20 mg/kg (n = 9) or 40 mg/kg (n = 9) every other week. Analyses were performed 52 weeks after the last patient was randomized to treatment. All patients (100%) survived to 18 months of age. A Cox proportional hazards analysis demonstrated that treatment reduced the risk of death by 99%, reduced the risk of death or invasive ventilation by 92%, and reduced the risk of death or any type of ventilation by 88%, as compared to an untreated historical control group. There was no clear advantage of the 40-mg/kg dose with regard to efficacy. Eleven of the 18 patients experienced 164 infusion-associated reactions; all were mild or moderate in intensity. Recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase is safe and effective for treatment of infantile-onset Pompe disease. Eleven patients experienced adverse events related to treatment, but none discontinued. The young age at which these patients initiated therapy may have contributed to their improved response compared to previous trials with recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase in which patients were older.",3
"Diverse PAH transcripts in lymphocytes of PKU patients with putative nonsense (G272X, Y356X) and missense (P281L, R408Q) mutations. || Cells, Cultured Homozygote Humans Lymphocytes Mutation Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias RNA Splicing RNA, Messenger Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Transcription, Genetic || The majority of mutations in the human phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene that lead to the recessive disease phenylketonuria (PKU) are believed to affect the activity or stability of the PAH enzyme. In this study we have performed in vivo analyses of lymphocyte PAH mRNA from PKU patients homozygous for the PKU missense mutations P281L and R408Q as well as the nonsense mutations G272X and Y356X. The mutations G272X, P281L and R408Q, which are located outside the consensus splice site sequence, result in transcripts with one or more exons skipped in addition to full-length transcripts. The mutation Y356X results in transcripts with one or more exons skipped, but no full-length transcripts. Our findings question the value of functional and structural predictions of mutations at the protein level without analyses of the corresponding transcript.",3 0
"The identification and management of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer in a large Jordanian family. || Adolescent Adult Aged Antigens, CD Cadherins Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Counseling Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Jordan Male Middle Aged Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary Pedigree Stomach Neoplasms || The management of families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer is challenging as screening for cancer in CDH1 mutation carriers is insufficiently sensitive and the commonly recommended option, prophylactic total gastrectomy, is associated with certain morbidity and even potential mortality. We describe the particular challenges associated with the diagnosis and management of a large Jordanian family with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. A preliminary pedigree enabled DNA testing for CDH1 mutation, denoted as c.1137G → A, on 4 family members; all were identified as mutation carriers. A family information service was then conducted in Amman, Jordan, where 40 family members gathered and we provided education and counseling. Signed permission enabled DNA collection for CDH1 germline mutation studies. Non-attendees were contacted and provided detailed information. Twenty-three family members have been tested for CDH1; 13 were positive and 10 were negative. The proband, a CDH1 mutation carrier, has undergone successful prophylactic total gastrectomy. We are hopeful that this model can be repeated throughout Jordan as well as other emerging countries where knowledge and action about hereditary cancer is lacking.",3 4
"Urinary biomarker investigation in children with Fabry disease using tandem mass spectrometry. || Adolescent Adult Aged Biomarkers Case-Control Studies Child Child, Preschool Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Cohort Studies Fabry Disease Female Genotype Glycolipids Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Mutation Sphingolipids Tandem Mass Spectrometry Trihexosylceramides Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder affecting both males and females with tremendous genotypic/phenotypic variability. Concentrations of globotriaosylceramide (Gb3), globotriaosylsphingosine (lyso-Gb3)/related analogues were investigated in pediatric and adult Fabry cohorts. The aims of this study were to transfer and validate an HPLC-MS/MS methodology on a UPLC-MS/MS new generation platform, using an HPLC column, for urine analysis of treated and untreated pediatric and adult Fabry patients, to establish correlations between the excretion of Fabry biomarkers with gender, treatment, types of mutations, and to evaluate the biomarker reliability for early detection of pediatric Fabry patients. A UPLC-MS/MS was used for biomarker analysis. Reference values are presented for all biomarkers. Results show that gender strongly influences the excretion of each biomarker in the pediatric Fabry cohort, with females having lower urinary levels of all biomarkers. Urinary distribution of lyso-Gb3/related analogues in treated Fabry males was similar to the untreated and treated Fabry female groups in both children and adult cohorts. Children with the late-onset p.N215S mutation had normal urinary levels of Gb3, and lyso-Gb3 but abnormal levels of related analogues. In this study, Fabry males and most Fabry females would have been diagnosed using the urinary lyso-Gb3/related analogue profile.",3
"Mutations of the GLA gene in young patients with stroke: the PORTYSTROKE study--screening genetic conditions in Portuguese young stroke patients. || Adult Age Factors Age of Onset Cohort Studies Fabry Disease Female Genetic Testing Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Portugal Prevalence Prospective Studies Stroke Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is an X-linked monogenic disorder caused by mutations in the GLA gene. Recent data suggest that stroke in young adults may be associated with Fabry disease. We aimed to ascertain the prevalence of this disorder among young adult patients with stroke in Portugal by GLA genotyping. During 1 year, all patients aged 18 to 55 years with first-ever stroke, who were admitted into any of 12 neurology hospital departments in Portugal, were prospectively enrolled (n=625). Ischemic stroke was classified according to Trial of Org 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment criteria. Alpha-galactosidase activity was further assayed in all patients with GLA mutations. Four hundred ninety-three patients (mean age, 45.4 years; 61% male) underwent genetic analyses: 364 with ischemic stroke, 89 with intracerebral hemorrhage, 26 with subarachnoid hemorrhage, and 14 with cerebral venous thrombosis. Twelve patients had missense GLA mutations: 9 with ischemic stroke (p.R118C: n=4; p.D313Y: n=5), including 5 patients with an identified cause of stroke (cardiac embolism: n=2; small vessel disease: n=2; other cause: n=1), 2 with intracerebral hemorrhage (p.R118C: n=1; p.D313Y: n=1), and one with cerebral venous thrombosis (p.R118C: n=1). Leukocyte alpha-galactosidase activity was subnormal in the hemizygous males and subnormal or low-normal in the heterozygous females. Estimated prevalence of missense GLA mutations was 2.4% (95% CI, 1.3% to 4.1%). Despite a low diagnostic yield, screening for GLA mutations should probably be considered in different types of stroke. Restricting investigation to patients with cryptogenic stroke may underestimate the true prevalence of Fabry disease in young patients with stroke.",3
"The TP53 mutation, R337H, is associated with Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndromes in Brazilian families. || Base Sequence Brazil DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Mutation, Missense Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || A TP53 germline mutation, R337H, has been previously described in children from southern Brazil with adrenocortical tumours but no documented familial history of other cancers. Here, we have screened for TP53 mutation 45 Brazilian unrelated individuals with family histories fulfilling the clinical definitions of Li-Fraumeni (LFS) or Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) syndromes. Mutations were found in 13 patients (28.9%), including six (46.1%) R337H mutations, and four novel germline mutations (V173M, V197M, G244D and IVS6+1G>T). Families with the R337H mutation presented a wide spectrum of tumours, including breast cancers (30.4%), brain cancers (10.7%), soft tissue sarcomas (10.7%) and adrenocortical carcinomas (8.9%). Testing of 53 Brazilian subjects with no cancer history showed that R337H was not a common polymorphism in that population. Moreover, loss of heterozygocity with retention of the R337H allele was observed in a breast adenocarcinoma, supporting a role for this mutation in breast tumorigenesis. These results show that the TP53 R337H germline mutation predisposes to a larger spectrum of tumours, similar to the one reported for other TP53 mutations.",3 4
"Molecular epidemiology and genotype-phenotype correlation in phenylketonuria patients from South Spain. || Adolescent Alleles Child Child, Preschool Female Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Male Molecular Epidemiology Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Spain || The aim of this study was to identify the most common genotypes in the phenylketonuria (PKU) population of Andalusia, assessing the correlation with the phenotype and the usefulness in predicting the response to treatment with tetrahydrobiopterin. We conducted a retrospective observational study between January 1980 and January 2010 in 147 Andalusian PKU patients assessing phenotype, genotype and response to a 24-h BH4 loading test. Our cohort of patients exhibited 65 different mutations, 69.2% corresponding to the missense type, in a total of 123 different genotypes. IVS10nt-11g>a was the most common mutation (10.9%). Four novel missense mutations were identified: p.L258P; p.E66K, p.R155C and p.P122S. Although generally there is a good genotype-phenotype correlation, for eight of the repeated genotypes a slightly different phenotype was observed. In 96 PKU subjects BH4 challenge was carried out. Patients with previously reported unresponsive mutations on both alleles showed a negative response, while 95.5% (28/29) of the responsive patients carry at least one missense mutation previously associated to the BH4. Our data reveal a great genetic heterogeneity in the Andalusian population. Genotype is quite a good predictor of the phenotype and of the responsiveness to tetrahydrobiopterin, which is relevant for patient management and follow-up.",3 1 0
"Childhood adrenocortical carcinoma as a sentinel cancer for detecting families with germline TP53 mutations. || Adrenocortical Carcinoma Child DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Malaysia Pedigree Sentinel Surveillance Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a highly penetrant, autosomal dominant disorder where affected individuals carry a 50% risk of developing cancer before 30 years of age. It is most commonly associated with mutations in the tumour suppressor gene, TP53. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a very rare paediatric cancer, and up to 80% of affected children are found to carry germline TP53 mutations. Hence, we propose using childhood ACC incidence as selection criteria for referral for TP53 mutation testing, independent of familial cancer history. Under the auspices of the Malaysian Society of Paediatric Haematology-Oncology, four eligible children diagnosed with ACC over a 30-month study period were referred for mutation testing. Three had a germline TP53 mutation. Subsequent TP53 testing in relatives showed two inherited mutations and one de novo mutation. These findings strongly support paediatric ACC as a useful sentinel cancer for initiating a germline TP53/LFS detection programme, particularly in countries where the lack of structured oncogenetic practice precludes the identification of families with LFS features.",3
"Molecular genetics of phenylketonuria in Mediterranean countries: a mutation associated with partial phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Blotting, Northern Gene Amplification Gene Frequency Haplotypes Humans Mutation Oligonucleotide Probes Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length || We report the characterization of a mutation in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene associated with partial residual activity of the enzyme. This point mutation (280glu----lys) was found by sequencing a mutant cDNA clone derived from a needle biopsy of the liver in a child with variant form of phenylketonuria. There is a strict concordance between homozygosity for the mutation and this particular phenotype. The (280glu----lys) mutation is linked to an original and rare RFLP haplotype at the PAH locus found in south Europe and North Africa. So far, this genotype-haplotype association is both inclusive and exclusive. Thirty-three PAH-deficient patients were screened for the mutation by using polymerase chain-reaction amplification of their genomic DNA extracted from Guthrie cards. Since a large number of patients can be screened for a particular mutation by using Guthrie cards, the possibility arises of using these samples collected by national newborn screening centers for prospective and retrospective detection of other mutations in the human genome.",3 0
"Cognitive characteristics of PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes. || Adolescent Adult Case-Control Studies Child, Preschool Cognition Female Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Mental Recall Middle Aged Neuropsychological Tests PTEN Phosphohydrolase Reference Values Young Adult || We sought to characterize cognition in individuals with germline PTEN mutations (n = 23) as well as in PTEN mutation-negative individuals with classic Cowden syndrome or Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (n = 2). Twenty-five individuals completed a comprehensive neuropsychological evaluation. One sample t-tests and effect sizes were used to examine differences in participant test scores compared with normal controls. Composite scores were created for each patient within each of the cognitive domains assessed and classified as above average, average, or below average according to normative standards. χ(2) analyses compared these classifications to expected proportions in normal control samples. The mean intelligence quotient was in the average range, and the range of intellectual functioning was very wide (from extremely low to very superior). However, in a large subset of patients, scores were lower than expected on measures of motor functioning, executive functioning, and memory recall, suggesting disruption of frontal circuits in these participants. This is the first study to characterize cognition in individuals with PTEN mutations and associated syndromes using a comprehensive neuropsychological battery. Contrary to previous reports suggesting an association with intellectual disability, the mean intelligence quotient was average, and there was a broad range of intellectual abilities. Specific evidence of disruption of frontal circuits may have implications for treatment compliance and cancer surveillance, and further investigation is warranted.",3 4
"Molecular analysis of phenylketonuria in Denmark: 99% of the mutations detected by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. || Alleles Base Sequence DNA Mutational Analysis Databases, Factual Denmark Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel Gene Frequency Haplotypes Humans Infant, Newborn Molecular Sequence Data Neonatal Screening Nucleic Acid Denaturation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Point Mutation Sequence Deletion || We present the results of a comprehensive study on the molecular basis of phenylketonuria (PKU) in Denmark. A strategy relying on PCR in combination with denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis for analyzing the coding sequence and splice site junctions of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene allowed us to detect a molecular defect on 99% of 308 Danish PKU chromosomes. The mutational spectrum consists of 35 different mutations, including 23 missense mutations, 5 splice mutations, 4 nonsense mutations, and 3 deletions. Seventeen of these mutations have not been reported previously. The mutation detection assay presented in this report offers a simple and reliable methodological entity that can be applied to rapid diagnosis and carrier detection of phenylketonuria in any population, irrespective of the frequency and distribution of mutations.",3 1
"Molecular characterization of phenylketonuria and tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Japan. || Base Sequence Biopterin Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid DNA Primers Genotype Humans Japan Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense Nucleic Acid Amplification Techniques Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Sequence Analysis, DNA || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a heterogeneous metabolic disorder caused by a deficiency in hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). On the basis of phenotype/genotype correlations, determination of phenylketonuric genotype is important for classification of the clinical phenotype and treatment of PKU, including tetrahydrobiopterin therapy. We characterized the genotypes of 203 Japanese patients with PKU and hyperphenylalaninemia using the following systems: (1) denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography with a GC-clamped primer; (2) direct sequencing; and, (3) multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. Of 406 mutant alleles, 390 (96%) were genotyped; 65 mutations were identified, including 22 new mutations. R413P, R241C, IVS4-1g>a, R111X and R243Q were prevalent mutations. Mutations prevalent in the Japanese cohort are also common in Korean and Northern Chinese populations, suggesting same origin. The spectrum of prevalent mutations was not significantly different among six Japanese districts, indicating that Japan comprises a relatively homogeneous ethnic group. We classified the mutations by clinical phenotypes and in vivo PAH activity and estimated the mutations with potential tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) responsiveness. The frequency of BH(4) responsiveness based on the genotype was 29.1% in Japanese PKU patients. A catalog of PKU genotypes would be useful for predicting clinical phenotype, deciding on the subsequent treatment of PKU including BH(4) therapy, and genetic counseling in East Asia.",3 1
"A mutation analysis of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene in the Israeli population. || Arabs DNA Mutational Analysis Humans Israel Jews Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase || Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) is a group of diseases characterized by a persistent elevation of phenylalanine levels in tissues and biological fluids. The most frequent form is phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency, causing phenylketonuria (PKU). Among 159 Israeli patients (Jews, Muslim and Christian Arabs and Druze) with HPA, in whom at least one of the mutations was characterized, a total of 43 different mutations were detected, including seven novel ones. PKU was very rare among Ashkenazi Jews and relatively frequent among Jews from Yemen, the Caucasian Mountains, Bukhara and Tunisia. The mutations responsible for the high frequency were: exon3del (Yemenite Jews), L48S (Tunisian Jews) and E178G, P281L and L48S (Jews from the Caucasian Mountains and Bukhara). Among the non-Jewish Israeli citizens, the disease was relatively frequent in the Negev and in the Nazareth vicinity, and in many localities a unique mutation was detected, often in a single family. While marked genetic heterogeneity was observed in the Arab and Jewish populations, only one mutation A300S, was frequent in all of the communities. Several of the other frequent mutations were shared by the non-Ashkenazi Jews and Arabs; none were mutual to Ashkenazi Jews and Arabs.",3 1
"Enlarged vestibular aqueduct: a radiological marker of pendred syndrome, and mutation of the PDS gene. || Adolescent Adult Biomarkers Carrier Proteins Child Child, Preschool Deafness Goiter Humans Infant Membrane Transport Proteins Middle Aged Mutation Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Tomography, X-Ray Computed Vestibular Aqueduct || Although the textbook view of Pendred syndrome is that of an autosomal recessive condition characterized by deafness and goitre, it is increasingly clear that not all such patients present this classical clinical picture. Malformations of the inner ear, specifically enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct, are common in Pendred syndrome and mutations in the PDS (Pendred Syndrome) gene have been recorded in patients presenting with deafness and vestibular aqueduct dilatation only, without other features of Pendred syndrome. Since this is the most common radiological malformation of the cochlea in deaf patients, we investigated what proportion of such cases were due to mutation of the PDS gene. We assessed 57 patients referred with radiological evidence of vestibular aqueduct enlargement, by history, clinical examination, perchlorate discharge test and molecular analysis of the PDS locus. Forty-one patients (72%) had unequivocal evidence of Pendred syndrome. The finding of a single heterozygous mutation at the PDS gene in a further eight was strongly suggestive of a critical role for pendrin, the protein product of the PDS gene, in the generation of enlarged vestibular aqueducts in at least 86% (49/57 cases) of patients with this radiological malformation. Securing the diagnosis of Pendred syndrome may be difficult, especially in the single case. Goitre is an inconstant finding, and the perchlorate discharge test, although helpful, is of diagnostic value only if abnormal. Enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct should be considered as the most likely presentation of Pendred syndrome and should prompt specific investigation of that diagnostic possibility. Pendred syndrome might henceforth be recharacterized as deafness with enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct, which is sometimes associated with goitre.",3 1 4
"Haplotypes and mutations of the PAH locus in Egyptian families with PKU. || Egypt Haplotypes Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic || A high degree of molecular heterogeneneity at the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) locus was established by examining RFLP haplotypes and PAH mutations in the families of 13 Egyptians with phenylketenouria (PKU). Thirteen different haplotypes were unequivocally determined in these kindreds. Haplotypes 1.8, 3.9, 4.3, 7.8, 22.11, 27.6, and 52.8 were found segregating with normal chromosomes, whilst haplotypes 1.8, 5.9, 23.8, 32.8, the newly assigned 73.9, and two as yet incomplete but novel haplotypes were found segregating with the mutant chromosomes. There was no particular preference for a single haplotype among normal or mutant chromosomes. Nine different mutations were also identified among the 26 alleles. IVS 10nt11g (8/26), IVS 2nt5g-c (4/26), R261Q (3/26), R176X (2/26), Y206D (2/26), S231P (2/26), Y198fs [593-614del22bp]; (2/26), G46fs [136/137delG]; (1/26), and E178G (1/26). Six of these mutations (IVS 2nt5g-c, R176X, Y198fs, R261Q, S231P, and IVS 10nt11g) are common to other Mediterranean populations. Two mutations not previously reported in the Mediterranean basin were also observed (Y206D and G46fs). These intriguing preliminary findings confirm IVS 10nt11g as a major mutation among Mediterranean mutations and demonstrate the need for a more comprehensive study of Arab populations to confirm the uniqueness of the two novel mutations to the Egyptian population.",3
"Identification of three novel missense PKU mutations among Chinese. || Alleles Amino Acid Sequence Asian Continental Ancestry Group Base Sequence China Codon DNA Mutational Analysis Humans Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Three novel missense mutations have been identified in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genes of Chinese individuals afflicted with various degrees of phenylketonuria (PKU). A T-to-C transition was observed in exon 5 of the gene, resulting in the substitution of Phe161 by Ser161. Two substitutions, G-to-T and T-to-G, were observed in exon 7, resulting in the substitution of Gly247 by Val247 and Leu255 by Val255, respectively. Expression analysis demonstrated that these mutant proteins produced between 0 and 15% of normal PAH enzyme activity. Population screening of a Chinese sample population indicates that these mutations are quite rare, together accounting for only about 4% of all PKU alleles among the Chinese. The P161S and G247V mutations were each present on a single PAH RFLP haplotype 4 chromosome in patients form Northern China, while the L255V mutation was present on chromosomes of both haplotypes 18 and 21 in patients from Southern China. These results suggest that the remaining 30% of uncharacterized PKU alleles in the Chinese population may bear a large number of relatively rare PAH mutations.",3 1 0
"Biochemical and imaging surveillance in germline TP53 mutation carriers with Li-Fraumeni syndrome: 11 year follow-up of a prospective observational study. || Adolescent Adult Aged Biomarkers, Tumor Child Child, Preschool Female Follow-Up Studies Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Heterozygote Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Middle Aged Multimodal Imaging Neoplasm Staging Neoplasms Population Surveillance Prognosis Prospective Studies Survival Rate Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Young Adult || Carriers of a germline TP53 pathogenic variant have a substantial lifetime risk of developing cancer. In 2011, we did a prospective observational study of members of families who chose to either undergo a comprehensive surveillance protocol for individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome or not. We sought to update our assessment of and modify the surveillance protocol, so in this study we report both longer follow-up of these patients and additional patients who underwent surveillance, as well as update the originally presented surveillance protocol. A clinical surveillance protocol using physical examination and frequent biochemical and imaging studies (consisting of whole-body MRI, brain MRI, breast MRI, mammography, abdominal and pelvic ultrasound, and colonoscopy) was introduced at three tertiary care centres in Canada and the USA on Jan 1, 2004, for carriers of TP53 pathogenic variants. After confirmation of TP53 mutation, participants either chose to undergo surveillance or chose not to undergo surveillance. Patients could cross over between groups at any time. The primary outcome measure was detection of asymptomatic tumours by surveillance investigations. The secondary outcome measure was 5 year overall survival established from a tumour diagnosed symptomatically (in the non-surveillance group) versus one diagnosed by surveillance. We completed survival analyses using an as-treated approach. Between Jan 1, 2004, and July 1, 2015, we identified 89 carriers of TP53 pathogenic variants in 39 unrelated families, of whom 40 (45%) agreed to surveillance and 49 (55%) declined surveillance. 19 (21%) patients crossed over from the non-surveillance to the surveillance group, giving a total of 59 (66%) individuals undergoing surveillance for a median of 32 months (IQR 12-87). 40 asymptomatic tumours have been detected in 19 (32%) of 59 patients who underwent surveillance. Two additional cancers were diagnosed between surveillance assessments (false negatives) and two biopsied lesions were non-neoplastic entities on pathological review (false positives). Among the 49 individuals who initially declined surveillance, 61 symptomatic tumours were diagnosed in 43 (88%) patients. 21 (49%) of the 43 individuals not on surveillance who developed cancer were alive compared with 16 (84%) of the 19 individuals undergoing surveillance who developed cancer (p=0·012) after a median follow-up of 46 months (IQR 22-72) for those not on surveillance and 38 months (12-86) for those on surveillance. 5 year overall survival was 88·8% (95% CI 78·7-100) in the surveillance group and 59·6% (47·2-75·2) in the non-surveillance group (p=0·0132). Our findings show that long-term compliance with a comprehensive surveillance protocol for early tumour detection in individuals with pathogenic TP53 variants is feasible and that early tumour detection through surveillance is associated with improved long-term survival. Incorporation of this approach into clinical management of these patients should be considered. Canadian Institutes for Heath Research, Canadian Cancer Society, Terry Fox Research Institute, SickKids Foundation, and Soccer for Hope Foundation.",3 4
"Twenty novel mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A gene causing Fabry disease. || Alternative Splicing Chromosome Mapping Exons Fabry Disease Female Genetic Carrier Screening Genetic Markers Humans Introns Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Male Mutation Mutation, Missense X Chromosome alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease, an X-linked inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism, results from the deficient activity of the lysosomal exoglycohydrolase alpha-galactosidase A (EC 3.2.1.22; alpha-Gal A). The nature of the molecular lesions in the alpha-Gal A gene in 30 unrelated families was determined to provide precise heterozygote detection, prenatal diagnosis, and define genotype-phenotype correlations. Genomic DNA was isolated from affected males and/or carrier females from 30 unrelated families with Fabry disease. The entire alpha-Gal A coding region and flanking intronic sequences were analyzed by PCR amplification and automated sequencing. Twenty new mutations were identified, each in a single family: C142R, G183D, S235C, W236L, D244H, P259L, M267I, I289F, Q321E, C378Y, C52X, W277X, IVS4(+4), IVS6(+2), IVS6(-1), 35del13, 256del1, 892ins1, 1176del4, and 1188del1. In the remaining 10 unrelated Fabry families, 9 previously reported mutations were detected: M42V, R112C, S148R, D165V, N215S (in 2 families), Q99X, C142X, R227X, and 1072del3. Haplotype analysis using markers closely flanking the alpha-Gal A gene indicated that the two patients with the N215S lesion were unrelated. The IVS4(+4) mutation was a rare intronic splice site mutation that causes Fabry disease. These studies further define the heterogeneity of mutations in the alpha-Gal A gene causing Fabry disease, permit precise heterozygote detection and prenatal diagnosis, and help delineate phenotype-genotype correlations in this disease. </AB",3 4
"Prevalence and Spectrum of Germline Cancer Susceptibility Gene Mutations Among Patients With Early-Onset Colorectal Cancer. || Adult Age of Onset Colorectal Neoplasms Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Middle Aged Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Prevalence || Hereditary cancer syndromes infer high cancer risks and require intensive cancer surveillance, yet the prevalence and spectrum of these conditions among unselected patients with early-onset colorectal cancer (CRC) is largely undetermined. To determine the frequency and spectrum of cancer susceptibility gene mutations among patients with early-onset CRC. Overall, 450 patients diagnosed with colorectal cancer younger than 50 years were prospectively accrued from 51 hospitals into the Ohio Colorectal Cancer Prevention Initiative from January 1, 2013, to June 20, 2016. Mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency was determined by microsatellite instability and/or immunohistochemistry. Germline DNA was tested for mutations in 25 cancer susceptibility genes using next-generation sequencing. Mutation prevalence and spectrum in patients with early-onset CRC was determined. Clinical characteristics were assessed by mutation status. In total 450 patients younger than 50 years were included in the study, and 75 gene mutations were found in 72 patients (16%). Forty-eight patients (10.7%) had MMR-deficient tumors, and 40 patients (83.3%) had at least 1 gene mutation: 37 had Lynch syndrome (13, MLH1 [including one with constitutional MLH1 methylation]; 16, MSH2; 1, MSH2/monoallelic MUTYH; 2, MSH6; 5, PMS2); 1 patient had the APC c.3920T>A, p.I1307K mutation and a PMS2 variant; 9 patients (18.8%) had double somatic MMR mutations (including 2 with germline biallelic MUTYH mutations); and 1 patient had somatic MLH1 methylation. Four hundred two patients (89.3%) had MMR-proficient tumors, and 32 patients (8%) had at least 1 gene mutation: 9 had mutations in high-penetrance CRC genes (5, APC; 1, APC/PMS2; 2, biallelic MUTYH; 1, SMAD4); 13 patients had mutations in high- or moderate-penetrance genes not traditionally associated with CRC (3, ATM; 1, ATM/CHEK2; 2, BRCA1; 4, BRCA2; 1, CDKN2A; 2, PALB2); 10 patients had mutations in low-penetrance CRC genes (3, APC c.3920T>A, p.I1307K; 7, monoallelic MUTYH). Importantly, 24 of 72 patients (33.3%) who were mutation positive did not meet established genetic testing criteria for the gene(s) in which they had a mutation. Of 450 patients with early-onset CRC, 72 (16%) had gene mutations. Given the high frequency and wide spectrum of mutations, genetic counseling and testing with a multigene panel could be considered for all patients with early-onset CRC.",3 4
"Twenty-two novel mutations in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) underscore the genotype-phenotype correlation in glycogen storage disease type II. ||  || Patients with glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII, Pompe disease) suffer from progressive muscle weakness due to acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency. The disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait with a spectrum of clinical phenotypes. We have investigated 29 cases of GSDII and thereby identified 55 pathogenic mutations of the acid alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) encoding acid maltase. There were 34 different mutations identified, 22 of which were novel. All of the missense mutations and two other mutations with an unpredictable effect on acid alpha-glucosidase synthesis and function were transiently expressed in COS cells. The effect of a novel splice-site mutation was investigated by real-time PCR analysis. The outcome of our analysis underscores the notion that the clinical phenotype of GSDII is largely dictated by the nature of the mutations in the GAA alleles. This genotype-phenotype correlation makes DNA analysis a valuable tool to help predict the clinical course of the disease.",2 1 4 0 3
"Quantitative computed tomography for enzyme replacement therapy in Pompe disease. || Child, Preschool Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Liver Muscle, Skeletal Oligosaccharides Tomography, X-Ray Computed alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme, acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA). To the best of our knowledge, no studies have reported the results of systematic and sequential CT analyses before and during ERT. In this study we have treated three patients with late onset Pompe disease by ERT, and investigated the efficacy of treatment by computed tomography number. We measured the serial changes in the computed tomography (CT) number of multiple organs in three patients with late onset of Pompe disease during 24 months of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). Before treatment, the liver and muscle CT numbers were higher in these patients than in the controls. The liver CT number decreased after performing ERT. Furthermore, the urinary glucose tetrasaccharide levels, a biomarker of glycogen accumulation, were elevated before ERT and reduced thereafter. The findings in these cases suggest that the elevation of the liver CT number represents glycogen accumulation in the liver and that the analysis of the liver CT number is therefore a useful tool for assessing the efficacy of ERT.",3 1
"Mutational spectrum in German patients with phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. ||  || We report on the spectrum and frequency of mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene in 226 German families with PAH deficiency, most of them from Southern Germany. A total of 88 mutations were identified in 428 out of 438 mutant PAH alleles including one novel stop mutation L293X (c.878T>A). In three families, two phenylketonuria (PKU) mutations were found in cis, and in one family a de novo mutation was observed. A comparison of the results from Southern Germany with those of other parts of Western Germany showed no obvious local mutation clustering. In addition we studied the genotypic spectrum of 39 Turkish families with PAH deficiency. Twenty-three mutations were identified in 73 out of 75 Turkish chromosomes including two novel mutations: E280A (c.839A>G) in Exon 7 and IVS10-7C>A (c.1066-7C>A) in Intron 10. A new polymorphism IVS4+47C/T (c.441+47C>T) was found in mutant and normal PAH alleles. Screening of 170 German and 150 Turkish individuals without family history of PAH deficiency revealed 10 and 12 heterozygotes, respectively, a higher frequency of carriers than expected. A novel mutations of uncertain functional relevance, R169H (c.506G>A) in Exon 5 was found in two Turkish heterozygotes. Most of the Turkish heterozygotes carried mild mutations, indicating that mild forms of PAH deficiency may be more common in that population than previously recognised.",3
"Mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in Iranian patients with phenylketonuria. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disease which results from mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. The aim of this study was the identification of sixteen different mutations in Iranian patients with hyperphenylalaninemia. The mutations were detected during the characterization of PAH genotypes of 39 PKU patients from Qazvin and Zanjan provinces of Iran. PAH mutations have been analyzed by PCR and direct sequencing of PCR products of the promoter region and all 13 exons of PAH gene, including the splicing sites. A mutation detection rate of 74.3 % was realized. Two mutations were found at high frequencies: R176X (10.25 %) and p.P281L (10.25 %). The frequencies of the other mutations were: IVS2+5G>A (2.56 %), IVS2+5G>C (2.56 %), p.L48S (2.56 %), p.R243Q (2.56 %), p.R252Q (5.12 %), p.R261Q (7.69 %), p.R261X (5.12 %), p.E280K (2.56 %), p.I283N (2.56 %), IVS9+5G>A (2.56 %), IVS9+1G>A (1.28 %), IVS11+1G>C (1.28 %), p.C357R (1.28 %), c.632delC (2.56 %). The present results confirm the high heterogeneity of the PAH locus and contribute to information about the distribution and frequency of PKU mutations in the Iranian population.",3 1
"Cognitive functions in patients with phenylketonuria in long-term treatment with tetrahydrobiopterin. || Adolescent Biopterin Child Cognition Compassionate Use Trials Humans Intelligence Phenylketonurias || Cognitive functions were assessed in 9 patients with mild to moderate phenylketonuria (PKU) ranging from 6 to 18 years of age, who were in long-term treatment (>5 years) with 5-9 mg/kg/day tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) on compassionate use, provided by Schircks Inc. An extensive study of cognitive functions (intelligence quotient (IQ), visuospatial, visual memory, fine motor, executive and attentional functions) was conducted, and behavior was assessed using the ADHD Rating Scale and the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function (BRIEF). All patients had normal IQ (M=107, SD=10). The most notable area of impairment was fine motor function, but no significant difference was found between the PKU patients in BH4 treatment who participated in the current study and PKU patients in dietary treatment who participated in a previous study. These results, however, should be interpreted with caution. It is necessary to conduct further studies with a larger number of patients, using more sensitive tests of motor function and using the formulation of BH4 that is currently available.",3 1
"Molecular characterization of phenylketonuria in Japanese patients. || Animals COS Cells Genotype Humans Japan Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Regression Analysis Sequence Analysis, DNA Transfection || We characterized phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotypes of Japanese patients with phenylketonuria (PKU) and hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA). PKU and HPA mutations in 41 Japanese patients were identified by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and direct sequencing, followed by restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis to find a large deletion involving exons 5 and 6. Of 82 mutant alleles, 76 (92%) were genotyped showing 21 mutations. The major mutations were R413P (30.5%), R243Q (7.3%), R241 C (7.3%), IVS4nt-1 (7.3%), T2781 (7.3%), E6nt-96A-->g (6.1%), Y356X (4.9%), R111X (3.7%), and 442-706delE5/6 (2.4%). Eight new mutations (L52 S, delS70, S70P, Y77X, IVS3nt-1, A132 V, W187 C, and C265Y) and a polymorphism of IVS10nt-14 were detected. In vitro PAH activities of mutant PAH cDNA constructs were determined by a COS cell expression system. Six mutations, viz., R408Q, L52 S, R241 C, S70P, V388 M, and R243Q, had 55%, 27%, 25%, 20%, 16% and 10% of the in vitro PAH activity of normal constructs, respectively. The mean pretreatment phenylalanine concentration (0.83+/-0.21 mmol/l) of patients carrying the R408Q, R241 C, or L52 S mutation and a null mutation was significantly lower (P<0.0005) than that (1.99+/-0.65 mmol/l) of patients with both alleles carrying mutations associated with a severe genotype. Simple linear regression analysis showed a correlation between pretreatment phenylalanine concentrations and predicted PAH activity in 29 Japanese PKU patients (y=31.9-1.03x, r=0.59, P<0.0001). Genotype determination is useful in the prediction of biochemical and clinical phenotypes in PKU and can be of particular help in managing patients with this disorder.",3 1 0
Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in a population in Germany: mutational profile and nine novel mutations. ||  || ,3 1
"Assessment of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4))-responsiveness and spontaneous phenylalanine reduction in a phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency population. || Adolescent Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Female Humans Infant Male Mutation Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Treatment Outcome Young Adult || A BH(4) loading test was performed in 36 patients from 34 unrelated families. The patients had 29 different genotypes, and previous data on only eight of them were found in the BIOPKU database. Thirteen patients were classified as classic PKU (35.1%), 14 as mild PKU (37.8%) and 9 as MHP (27.0%). Blood Phe levels were shown to reach a plateau after three full days of increased natural protein ingestion. Measuring the 24-hour blood Phe levels (T(-24), T(-16), T(0)) on the fourth day of increased protein ingestion before BH(4) administration showed that within 24h Phe on average increased by 2.4% in MHP patients, decreased by 2.7% in mild PKU patients and increased by 9.7% in classic PKU patients (NS for all comparisons); Phe only slightly decreased in responders by 0.2% but increased in non-responders by 7.8% (P>0.05). Altogether, 16 of 36 (44.4%) patients represented by 12 of 29 (41.4%) different genotypes were proven to be BH(4) responders, and four (10.8%) were slow-responders. Responders were 6/9 (66.7%) MHP patients, 10/14 (71.4%) mild PKU patients and 0/13 classic PKU patients. Twenty of the 29 (68.9%) genotypes harbored at least one mutation with a known PRA of 10% or more but only 11 (55%) of them were BH(4)-responsive. Spontaneous reduction of blood Phe levels within 24h on the fourth day of natural protein loading was observed only in mild PKU patients and was shown not to be an important part of the BH(4)-response. 73.3% of genotypes containing at least one allele with a PRA of at least 30% were found to be BH(4) responsive; a PRA of at least 15.5% was needed for the responder genotype in our population.",3
"Predicting PTEN mutations: an evaluation of Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome clinical features. || Adult Cohort Studies Exons Genotype Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Logistic Models Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phenotype || Cowden syndrome (CS) is associated with benign hamartomatous lesions and risks for thyroid, breast and endometrial cancers. Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome is an allelic disorder characterised by macrocephaly, intestinal polyps, lipomas, and pigmented penile macules. Diagnostic criteria for CS are based on the presence of a range of clinical features. However, prior data on the component clinical features have been based primarily on compilations of cases reported before development of consensus diagnostic criteria. This study sought to determine the clinical features most predictive of a mutation in the largest single cohort of patients with clinical testing for PTEN mutations reported to date. Molecular and clinical data were reviewed on 802 patients referred for PTEN analysis by a single laboratory. Deleterious mutations were found in 172 (21.4%) subjects. Among mutation carriers significant differences from previous reports were found for the frequencies of several clinical features, including macrocephaly, uterine fibroids, benign breast disease, and endometrial cancer. Logistic regression analyses indicated that female mutation carriers were best identified by the presence of macrocephaly, endometrial cancer, trichilemmomas, papillomatous papules, breast cancer, benign thyroid disease, and benign gastrointestinal (GI) lesions. For males, the most discriminating features were macrocephaly, lipomas, papillomatous papules, penile freckling, benign GI lesions, and benign thyroid disease. Age related differences were also identified. The mutation frequency in patients meeting CS diagnostic criteria (34%) was significantly lower than previously reported, suggesting a need for reevaluation of these criteria. A mutation prediction model has been developed which can help identify patients appropriate for PTEN testing in clinical practice.",3 4
"Genetic heterozygosity and pseudodeficiency in the Pompe disease newborn screening pilot program. || False Positive Reactions Feasibility Studies Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Haplotypes Humans Infant, Newborn Mutation Neonatal Screening Pilot Projects alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) caused by deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) activity. This is the first LSD in which newborn screening has been shown to improve clinical outcomes. Newborn screening also identified multiple rare gene variants in this population. Among 132,538 newborns screened, 107 babies (1 in 1239) who had low dried blood spot GAA activity were genotyped. Sixty-nine (64.5%) babies had a total of 54 mutations and 35 novel predictably pathogenic mutations; 36 babies (33.6%) who had no mutation were homozygous for the c.[1726A; 2065A] pseudodeficiency allele. Because 81% of the chromosomes (14% in the controls) were in haplotype *03, we found a link between the pseudodeficiency allele and other mutated alleles. The newborns with Pompe disease detected by screening had lymphocyte GAA activities 0.45 to 1.65 nmol/mg/h (normal 66.7+/-33.8), while only 2 of the 100 false-positive cases had GAA activity less than 2.00 nmol/mg/h (or 3% of the normal mean). Therefore, newborn screening for Pompe disease could be successfully conducted by including genotyping and lymphocyte GAA assay, even in a population with mutation heterozygosity and pseudodeficiency.",3 1 4
"Mutational analysis of the GLA gene in Mexican families with Fabry disease. || DNA Mutational Analysis Fabry Disease Female Genotype Humans Male Mexico Microsatellite Repeats Mutation Pedigree Phenotype alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is a lysosomal storage disorder, which develops due to a deficiency in the hydrolytic enzyme, α-galactosidase A (α-Gal A). Alpha-Gal A hydrolyzes glycosphingolipid globotriaosylceramide (Gb3), and an α-Gal A deficiency leads to Gb3 accumulation in tissues and cells in the body. This pathology is likely to involve multiple systems, but it is generally considered to affect primarily vascular endothelium. In this study, we investigated mutations in the GLA gene, which encodes α-Gal A, in Mexican families with FD. We included seven probands with FD that carried known mutations. We analysed pedigrees of the probands, and performed molecular screening in 65 relatives with the potential of carrying a GLA mutation. Five mutations (P40S, IVS4+4, G328V, R363H, R404del) were detected in seven unrelated Mexican families with the classic FD phenotype. Of the 65 relatives examined, 42 (64.6%) had a GLA gene mutation. In summary, among seven Mexican probands with FD, 65 relatives were at risk of carrying a known GLA mutation, and molecular screening identified 42 individuals with the mutation. Thus, our findings showed that it is important to perform molecular analysis in families with FD to detect mutations and to provide accurate diagnoses for individuals that could be affected.",3 4
"Two distinct mutations at a single BamHI site in phenylketonuria. || Base Sequence Blotting, Southern Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 12 Deoxyribonuclease BamHI Exons Female Genes, Recessive Genotype Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length || Classical phenylketonuria is an autosomal recessive disease caused by a deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). The abolition of an invariant BamHI site located in the coding sequence of the PAH gene (exon 7) led to the recognition of two new point mutations at codon 272 and 273 (272gly----stop and 273ser----phe, respectively). Both mutations were detected in north eastern France or Belgium and occurred on the background of RFLP haplotype 7 alleles. The present study supports the view that the clinical heterogeneity in PKU is accounted for by the large variety of mutant genotypes associated with PAH deficiencies.",3
"Glycogen storage disease type II: identification of four novel missense mutations (D645N, G648S, R672W, R672Q) and two insertions/deletions in the acid alpha-glucosidase locus of patients of differing phenotype. || Adult Child, Preschool Female Fibroblasts Frameshift Mutation Genotype Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Homozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Muscles Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation Phenotype Sequence Analysis, DNA Sequence Deletion alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII), an autosomal recessive myopathic disorder, results from deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase. We searched for mutations in an evolutionarily conserved region in 54 patients of differing phenotype. Four novel mutations (D645N, G448S, R672W, and R672Q) and a previously described mutation (C647W) were identified in five patients and their deleterious effect on enzyme expression demonstrated in vitro. Two novel frame-shifting insertions/deletions (delta nt766-785/insC and +insG@nt2243) were identified in two patients with exon 14 mutations. The remaining three patients were either homozygous for their mutations (D645N/D645 and C647W/C647W) or carried a previously described leaky splice site mutation (IVS1-13T-->G). For all patients ""in vivo"" enzyme activity was consistent with clinical phenotype. Agreement of genotype with phenotype and in vitro versus in vivo enzyme was seen in three patients (two infantile patients carrying C647W/C647W and D645N/+insG@nt2243 and an adult patient heteroallelic for G648S/IVS1-13T-->G). Relative discordance was found in a juvenile patient homozygous for the non-expressing R672Q and an adult patient heterozygous for the minimally expressing R672W and delta nt766-785/+insC. Possible explanations include differences in in vitro assays vs in vivo enzyme activity, tissue specific expression with diminished enzyme expression/stability in fibroblasts vs muscle, somatic mosaicism, and modifying genes.",3 1 4 0
"Molecular epidemiology, genotype-phenotype correlation and BH4 responsiveness in Spanish patients with phenylketonuria. || Alleles Enzyme Replacement Therapy Gene Frequency Genetic Association Studies Genetic Heterogeneity Genotype Humans Molecular Epidemiology Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Spain || Phenylketonuria (PKU), the most common inborn error of amino acid metabolism, is caused by mutations in the phenylalanine-4-hydroxylase (PAH) gene. This study aimed to assess the genotype-phenotype correlation in the PKU Spanish population and the usefulness in establishing genotype-based predictions of BH4 responsiveness in our population. It involved the molecular characterization of 411 Spanish PKU patients: mild hyperphenylalaninemia non-treated (mild HPA-NT) (34%), mild HPA (8.8%), mild-moderate (20.7%) and classic (36.5%) PKU. BH4 responsiveness was evaluated using a 6R-BH4 loading test. We assessed genotype-phenotype associations and genotype-BH4 responsiveness in our population according to literature and classification of the mutations. The mutational spectrum analysis showed 116 distinct mutations, most missense (70.7%) and located in the catalytic domain (62.9%). The most prevalent mutations were c.1066-11G>A (9.7%), p.Val388Met (6.6%) and p.Arg261Gln (6.3%). Three novel mutations (c.61-13del9, p.Ile283Val and p.Gly148Val) were reported. Although good genotype-phenotype correlation was observed, there was no exact correlation for some genotypes. Among the patients monitored for the 6R-BH4 loading test: 102 were responders (87, carried either one or two BH4-responsive alleles) and 194 non-responders (50, had two non-responsive mutations). More discrepancies were observed in non-responders. Our data reveal a great genetic heterogeneity in our population. Genotype is quite a good predictor of phenotype and BH4 responsiveness, which is relevant for patient management, treatment and follow-up.",3 1
"PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome and Gorham-Stout phenomenon. || Family Fatal Outcome Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Heterozygote Humans Infant Male Osteolysis, Essential PTEN Phosphohydrolase || PTEN: hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS) is a group of syndromes caused by mutations in PTEN. Gorham-Stout phenomenon (GSP) is a rare condition characterized by proliferation of vascular structures in bones, resulting in progressive osteolysis. Here we present a 1-year-old boy with PHTS and GSP. The lesion that later proved to be GSP was evident from the age of 4 months, and became symptomatic at the age of 1 year. Eventually, he developed a fatal chylothorax. Mutation analysis revealed a germline heterozygous mutation c.517 C>T (p.Arg173Cys) in exon 6 of PTEN. Analysis of the lymphatic malformation (LM) tissue revealed no loss of heterozygosity (LOH) nor a second, somatic PTEN mutation of the remaining wild type allele. The germline p.Arg173Cys mutation was also present in the mother and the propositus' younger sister and brother. Further molecular work-up showed a heterozygous variant c.2180C>T (p.Ala727Val) FLT4 in the LM tissue, which was also present in the germline of mother and two siblings. GSP has not been reported before in a patient with a PTEN mutation. Up to this date, this mutation is the only genetic defect possibly involved in the etiology of GSP which is plausible given the known function of PTEN in angiogenic signaling.",2 3
Mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in mild hyperphenylalaninemia: a novel mutation in exon 3. ||  || ,3 1
"Mutational spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Sicily: implications for diagnosis of hyperphenylalaninemia in southern Europe. || Alleles Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Base Sequence DNA Mutational Analysis Europe Genotype Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Sicily || Hyperphenylalaninemia due to a deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) is the most common inborn error of amino acid metabolism. Clinically, the disorder is highly heterogeneous, spanning from nonphenylketonuria hyperphenylalaninemia to classical phenylketonuria. Only little is known about the molecular defects underlying hyperphenylalaninemia in Southern Europe. In this study, we conducted a systematic analysis of 53 patients from the Sicilian population. Each patient included in the study had persistently elevated blood levels of phenylalanine and met the differential criteria for PAH deficiency. Genomic DNA was analysed by scanning all PAH-coding exons for mutations by PCR in combination with denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). 52 patients were completely genotyped. A spectrum of 40 different mutations was established including 17 novel PAH mutations. Our results explain the clinical heterogeneity of hyperphenylalaninemia in Southern Europe, and form the basis for the establishment of phenotype-genotype correlations in Sicily and surrounding countries.",3 1
"Long-term follow-up results in enzyme replacement therapy for Pompe disease: a case report. ||  || Pompe disease (PD) is a metabolic myopathy caused by a deficiency of acid-alpha glucosidase (GAA), a lysosomal enzyme that cleaves glycogen. The classic infantile-onset form is characterised by severe hypotonia and cardiomyopathy. Untreated patients usually die within the first year of life due to cardiorespiratory failure. Several studies involving patients with infantile-onset PD have shown that enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with alglucosidase alfa, recombinant human GAA (rhGAA), significantly prolongs survival, decreases cardiomegaly, and improves cardiac function and conduction abnormalities. However, the efficacy on motor, cognitive and social milestones appears to be more related to the condition of the patient before the start of treatment. To date, the sample of early diagnosed and treated patients is small and the length of follow-up is still limited. We report the results of a long-term follow-up of one patient presenting severe bradycardia and cardiomyopathy at birth, diagnosed in the third day of life and successfully treated by ERT. Serum muscle enzymes at diagnosis were AST 200 U/L, ALT 99 U/L and CPK 731 U/L (n.v. 0-295); the molecular study identified the homozygous missense mutation c.1933 G> A p.Asp645Asn (GAA exon 14). Left Ventricular Mass Index (LVMI) at baseline was 171 g/m(2) (Z-score = 4.3) and decreased to normal values since the 3-month follow-up. A muscle biopsy performed at 18 months after the start of therapy, showed only a low degree of muscle involvement. To our knowledge, this is the longest ERT treatment follow-up in a symptomatic neonatal patient with Pompe disease.",3 1
"Molecular genetics and impact of residual in vitro phenylalanine hydroxylase activity on tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness in Turkish PKU population. || Alleles Biopterin Dose-Response Relationship, Drug Female Genetic Association Studies Genetic Variation Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Male Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Turkey || The prevalence of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH)-deficient phenylketonuria (PKU) in Turkey is high (1 in 6500 births), but data concerning the genotype distribution and impact of the genotype on tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) therapy are scarce. To characterize the phenotypic and genotypic variability in the Turkish PKU population and to correlate it with physiological response to BH(4) challenge. We genotyped 588 hyperphenylalaninemic patients and performed a BH(4) loading test (20mg/kg bw) in 462 patients. Residual PAH activity of mutant proteins was calculated from available in vitro expression data. Data were tabulated in the BIOPKU database (www.biopku.org). Eighty-eight mutations were observed, the most common missense mutations being the splice variant c.1066-11G>A (24.6%). Twenty novel mutations were detected (11 missense, 4 splice-site, and 5 deletion/insertions). Two mutations were observed in 540/588 patients (91.8%) but in 9 patients atypical genotypes with >2 mutations were found (8 with p.R155H in cis with another variant) and in 19 patients mutations were found in BH(4)-metabolizing genes. The most common genotype was c.1066-11G>A/c.1066-11G>A (15.5%). Approximately 22% of patients responded to BH(4) challenge. A substantial in vitro residual activity (average >25% of the wild-type enzyme) was associated with response to BH(4). In homozygous genotypes (n=206), both severity of the phenotype (r=0.83) and residual PAH activity (r=0.85) correlate with BH(4) responsiveness. Together with the BH(4) challenge, these data enable the genotype-based classification of BH(4) responsiveness and document importance of residual PAH activity. This first report of a large-scale genotype assessment in a population of Turkish PKU patients also documents a high prevalence (47%) of the severe classic phenotype.",3 1 0
"Molecular correlations in phenylketonuria: mutation patterns and corresponding biochemical and clinical phenotypes in a heterogeneous California population. || California Female Genetic Heterogeneity Genotype Humans Intelligence Linear Models Male Mutation Neonatal Screening Phenotype Phenylketonurias Population Surveillance || We studied 133 California phenylketonuria (PKU) patients and one obligate heterozygote to delineate the molecular basis of PKU in a population with greater ethnic diversity than in previous studies, and to determine whether a correlation exists between genotype and clinical phenotype, with the latter defined by both the diagnostic pretreatment blood phenylalanine (PHE) level and cognitive (IQ) test scores. To determine PAH genotypes, we used PCR-mediated amplification, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, and direct sequencing on dried whole blood samples. Where possible, mutation severity was defined according to predicted in vitro PAH enzyme activity estimated by using Cos cell expression analysis for a given mutation. We then asked whether mutation severity, as defined by such expression analysis, correlated with pretreatment PHE levels or with IQ test results. A mutation was identified in 236 (88%) of 267 mutant alleles. Seventeen new mutant alleles were found; A47E, T81P, I102T, E182G, T328D, Y343P, K371R, Y387H, A389E, E422K, IVS9nt5, IVS11nt20, delS70, del364-368/del198-220, delF299, delT323, and -1C/T. In striking contrast to a number of studies in other populations, in this study, based on predicted PAH activity, we observed no correlation between mutation severity and pretreatment PHE levels. There was also no correlation between genotype and IQ. We conclude that in samples collected from an ethnically heterogeneous population, there is no correlation of mutation severity with either pretreatment PHE levels or IQ measurement in treated patients. We caution that genetic counseling in PKU should incorporate the notion that prognosis may not be predicted with precision based on mutation analysis in a given patient.",3 0
"Ethylmalonic encephalopathy. Another patient from Kuwait. ||  || We report a Kuwaiti girl with ethylmalonic encephalopathy. She presented at the age of 4 months with chronic mucoid diarrhea and delayed psychomotor development, and at 6 months she developed myoclonic epilepsy. She was found to have central hypotonia with pyramidal tract signs, acrocyanosis, and petechiae. Plasma lactate level was elevated. Blood spot and urine for organic acids results were consistent with the diagnosis of ethylmalonic encephalopathy. Cerebral MRI showed basal ganglia and white matter changes. Gene mutation study revealed homozygous deletion of exon 4 of the ETHE1 gene. The patient died at 14 months after extensive bronchopneumonia. Our objective is to alert physicians to the existence of such a devastating disease in our community and their role in the early diagnosis in the index patient for proper genetic counseling.",3
"Phenylketonuria and hyperphenylalaninemia in eastern Germany: a characteristic molecular profile and 15 novel mutations. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an important error of amino acid metabolism which results in most patients from phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency. PKU displays a marked genotypic heterogeneity both within and between different populations. The aim of this study was to establish the genotypic spectrum of PKU in eastern Germany, and to compare this to the distribution of mutations in western Germany. The study population included 302 patients in 290 families who were followed at treatment centers in Berlin, Leipzig and Jena. The study showed marked genotypic variability with a total of 75 mutations, including 15 that have so far not been described (eleven missense mutations, one splicing mutation, and three small deletions). One of these novel mutations, E183Q, occurred in cis to a R408W mutation. In the non-immigrant eastern German population, the frequency of R408W accounted for 40.1% of the PKU alleles. In the immigrant Turkish population of the former West Berlin, the most prevalent mutation was IVS10-11G>A (57%). There was a marked difference of the genotypic spectrum between the population studied here and the data reported from the western part of the country.",3 1
"Remarkably low fibroblast acid α-glucosidase activity in three adults with Pompe disease. || Adult Alleles Fibroblasts Genetic Association Studies Genotype Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Heterozygote Humans Infant, Newborn Male Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal Mutation Phenotype alpha-Glucosidases || Most adults with Pompe disease are compound heterozygotes in which one acid α-glucosidase (GAA) allele harbors the c.-32-13T>G mutation, causing partial loss of GAA, and the other allele harbors a fully deleterious mutation. The fibroblast GAA activity in these patients is usually between 5% and 25% of the average in healthy individuals. In some adult patients, however, the fibroblast GAA activity is much lower and is in the range that is normally observed in classic-infantile Pompe disease. We investigated the genotype-phenotype correlation in three such adult patients and measured the GAA activity as well as the glycogen content in muscle and fibroblasts in order to better understand the clinical course. DNA was sequenced and GAA activity and glycogen content were measured in leukocytes, fibroblasts and muscle. Muscle biopsies were microscopically analyzed and the biosynthesis of GAA in fibroblasts was analyzed by immunoblotting. GAA activity and glycogen content in fibroblasts and muscle tissue in healthy controls, adult patients with Pompe disease and classic-infantile patients were compared with those of the three index patients. One patient had genotype c.525delT/c.671G>A (r.0/p.Arg224Gln). Two affected brothers had genotype c.569G>A/c.1447G>A (p.Arg190His/p.Gly483Arg). In all three cases the GAA activity and the glycogen content in fibroblasts were within the same range as in classic-infantile Pompe disease, but the activity and glycogen content in muscle were both within the adult range. In fibroblasts, the first step of GAA synthesis appeared unaffected but lysosomal forms of GAA were not detectable with immunoblotting. Some adult patients with mutations other than c.-32-13T>G can have very low GAA activity in fibroblasts but express higher activity in muscle and store less glycogen in muscle than patients with classic-infantile Pompe disease. This might explain why these patients have a slowly progressive course of Pompe disease.",3 1 0
"Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer: association with lobular breast cancer. || Antigens, CD Breast Neoplasms Cadherins Carcinoma, Lobular Female Gastrectomy Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic Genetic Counseling Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Mass Screening Middle Aged Neoplasms, Multiple Primary Risk Stomach Neoplasms Syndrome || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) has been shown to be caused by germline mutations in the gene CDH1 located at 16q22.1, which encodes the cell-cell adhesion molecule, E-cadherin. Not only does loss of expression of E-cadherin account for the morphologic differences between intestinal and diffuse gastric cancer (DGC) variants, but it also appears to lead to distinct cellular features which appear to be common amongst related cancers that have been seen in the syndrome. As in most hereditary cancer syndromes, multiple organ sites may be commonly affected by cancer, in HDGC, lobular carcinoma of the breast (LBC) and possibly other organ sites have been shown to be associated with the familial cancer syndrome. Given the complexity of HDGC, not only with regard to the management of the DGC risk, but also with regard to the risk for other related cancers, such as LBC, a multi-disciplinary approach is needed for the management of individuals with known CDH1 mutations.",3
Phenylalanine hydroxylase gene: a novel splice mutation in intron 2 in two German and Polish families with severe phenylketonuria. ||  || ,2 1 3
"Identification of eight novel mutations of the acid alpha-glucosidase gene causing the infantile or juvenile form of glycogen storage disease type II. || Adult Asian Continental Ancestry Group DNA Mutational Analysis Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic Genetic Markers Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Homozygote Humans Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Taiwan alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen-storage disease type II (GSDII; OMIM #232300), an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a deficiency of the glycogen hydrolysis enzyme acid alpha-glucosidase (acid GAA; acid maltase, EC. 3.2.10.20), results in the accumulation of glycogen in the lysosome. We performed a molecular genetic study on 29 patients with infantile-onset glycogen-storage disease type II (GSDII), 6 with juvenile-onset GSDII and one carrier for GSDII. Seventeen different mutations were identified among them; 8 were novel mutations: c.421C > A (p.L141M), c.872T > C (p.L291P), c.893A > C (p.Y298S), c.1375G > A (p.D459N), c.1437G > C (p.K479N), c.1509_1511del (p.A504del), c.1960T > C (p.S654P), and c.2174G > C (p.R725P). One of the mutations identified, c.2238G > C (p.W746C), which was a sequence change of unknown pathogenic significance causing diminished enzyme activity,was found homozygously in a juvenile-onset patient. We also found a juvenile-onset patient with homozygote c.1935C > A mutation which was frequently found in infantile-onset patients. In addition to mutations, we also identified 14 new polymorphisms in the acid alpha-glucosidase gene. The genotype/phenotype correlations indicated that c.2238G > C (p.W746C) is correlated with juvenile- onset GSDII and that c.872T > C (p.L291P) and c.1411_1414del (p.E471fsX5) are correlated with infantile-onset GSDII. Mutational analysis of GAA is useful in genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis of the disease.",3 1
"Mutation spectrum of phenylketonuria in Syrian population: genotype-phenotype correlation. || Base Sequence Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Frameshift Mutation Genetic Association Studies Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Infant Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length RNA Splice Sites Syria || Characterization of the molecular basis of phenylketonuria (PKU) in Syria has been accomplished through the analysis of 78 unrelated chromosomes from 39 Syrian patients with PKU. Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene mutations have been analyzed by using molecular detection methods based on the restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), artificial constructed restriction sites (ACRS) PCR and direct DNA sequencing. 56.4% of the patients had cPKU. A mutation detection rate of 79.49% was achieved and sixteen different mutations were found: missense 56.25%, splice site 37.5%, and frameshift 6.25%. The predominant mutation in this population sample was p.R261Q G>A, p.F55>Lfs and p.R243Q G>A. No mutation in six PKU patients was observed. In 57.9% of patient genotypes, the metabolic phenotype could be predicted. The identification of the mutations in the PAH gene and the genotype-phenotype correlation should facilitate the evaluation of metabolic phenotypes, diagnosis, implementation of optimal dietary therapy, and determination of prognosis in the patients and genetic counseling for the patient's relatives.",3 1
"Should newborn mutation scanning for hyperphenylalaninaemia and galactosaemia be implemented? A Polish experience. ||  || To elucidate whether screening for mutations causing hyperphenylalaninaemia (HPA) and classic galactosaemia could provide important, additional information on a clinical phenotype. Genotypes that cause disease at the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene and galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT) gene in a group of 101 hyperphenylalaninaemic and 77 patients with classic galactosaemia were established. The PAH and GALT mutations were identified in genomic DNA extracted from whole blood leucocytes using single stranded conformational analysis and direct fluorescent sequencing of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products. Mild HPA and mild phenylketonurea (PKU) were caused by divergent genotypes. In the studied group a total of 26 different mild and intermediate PAH mutations were identified, most of them being rare ones. Classic galactosaemia was caused by two frequent mutations, accounting for 82% of all mutated alleles. Identification of mild or intermediate mutations causing HPA could provide fast and reliable information about future clinical outcome of a newborn infant. Molecular diagnosis of HPA should be preceded by biochemical analysis and implemented to differentiate mild forms of HPA and cases of ambiguous classification. Because of multiple rare mutations scattered on all exons, scanning of the entire PAH coding sequence could be useful and cost beneficial. Routine genotyping is not proposed in classic phenylketonuria and classic galactosaemia, as it provides limited additional, prospective information on the clinical phenotype.",3
"The E-cadherin gene (CDH1) variants T340A and L599V in gastric and colorectal cancer patients in Korea. || Adolescent Adult Aged Cadherins Case-Control Studies Child Child, Preschool Colorectal Neoplasms Female Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Neoplasm Proteins Pedigree Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Sequence Analysis, DNA Stomach Neoplasms || Germline mutations in E-cadherin (CDH1) have been reported in families with early onset, diffuse gastric cancer. More recently, mutations in CDH1 have been described in colorectal cancer cell lines. We have investigated if germline mutations in CDH1 occur among different groups of Korean gastric and colorectal cancer patients, with and without a positive family history. We studied 131 patients and 168 normal controls (88 Korean and 80 non-Korean). Patients were divided into five groups: group I, 20 gastric cancer patients with a family history; group II, 26 colorectal cancer patients with a family history of gastric cancer (those from familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) kindred were excluded); group III, 16 HNPCC patients without identified germline mutations in hMLH1 and hMSH2; group IV, 35 gastric cancer patients without a family history; and group V, 34 colorectal cancer patients without a family history. Polymerase chain reaction, single strand conformational polymorphism analysis, direct sequencing, and genotyping for identified variants were performed. Several germline changes in CDH1 were found. In addition to previously described polymorphisms, we found three novel changes, two of which were missense changes (T340A and L599V). T340A was present in one patient in group III and one in group V. L599V was present in one patient in group II, in two in group III, and in one in group IV. T340A was not found in normal controls while L599V was present in two of 88 Korean controls. Patients with these variants may appear to have a tendency to early onset cancer with a positive family history, although differences in frequencies did not reach statistical significance. Genotyping results suggest that these variants might have a common origin, particularly T340A. We have described two new missense germline variants in CDH1 in various groups of Korean gastrointestinal cancer patients. Further work is required to assess if these variants increase the risk of gastrointestinal cancer.",3
"The Spectrum of PAH Mutations and Increase of Milder Forms of Phenylketonuria in Sweden During 1965-2014. || Mutations Neonatal screening Newborn screening Phenylalanine hydroxylase Phenylketonuria || Newborn screening (NBS) for phenylketonuria (PKU) which has a continuum of disease severities has been performed for more than 50 years. The screening method has undergone a continuous development with not only improvements of the positive predictive value but also identification of milder forms of the disease. With the introduction of genetic testing the confirmation of the diagnosis has improved. The Swedish NBS is centralized to one laboratory, which also performs confirmatory testing.Here we present the results of NBS for PKU in Sweden during 1965-2014 describing an increase in diagnosed patients and a shift in the spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) mutations towards an increasing heterogeneity. Milder mutations common in southern Europe and the Middle East together with lowering of the recall level for phenylalanine (Phe) have led to a shift towards milder phenotypes among the patients identified by the screening program. The inclusion of a Phe and tyrosine (Tyr) ratio as an additional marker has improved the positive predictive value to the present 0.92. Also discussed is what impact earlier sampling has had on the prediction of disease severity, concluding that the shift of age at sampling from 72 to 48 h does not increase the risk of missing patients in need of treatment.",3
"The molecular basis of familial hypercholesterolaemia in Turkish patients. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool Frameshift Mutation Gene Deletion Genetic Heterogeneity Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Receptors, LDL Turkey || Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disorder of lipoprotein metabolism. In the majority of patients FH is caused by mutations in the gene for the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), and to date more than 700 mutations have been reported worldwide. In this study, 36 paediatric patients with a clinical diagnosis of FH (20 homozygous and 16 heterozygotes) were screened for mutations in the LDLR gene. Each exon, with intron-exon junctions, was screened by capillary fluorescent SSCP (F-SSCP) and heteroduplex analysis. Samples showing different band patterns were sequenced. Ten novel (including three frame shift small deletions or insertions) and seven known mutations were detected. A total of 37 out of the predicted 56 FH-causing alleles were identified (66.1%). No patients with the R3500Q mutation in the APOB gene were found. W556R was the most common mutation, explaining 21.4% of the predicted defective LDLR alleles. The novel sequence changes were deemed to be pathogenic if they altered a conserved amino acid (L143P, D147E, Q233H-C234G, C347G) or occurred in or close to a splice site (IVS 16+5) and were absent in DNA from 50 healthy Turkish subjects. These data confirm the genetic heterogeneity of FH in Turkey, and demonstrate the usefulness of F-SSCP for mutation detection.",3 4
"Detection of alpha-galactosidase a mutations causing Fabry disease by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography. ||  || Mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A, GLA) gene cause Fabry disease, an X-linked recessive lysosomal storage disease. The majority of mutations are private, and confirmation of carrier status in females requires the definitive identification of a DNA mutation. In addition, knowledge of a family's mutation enables rapid and precise preimplantation and prenatal genetic testing. Here we report the development and use of DHPLC to rapidly and cost-effectively screen for alpha-Gal A mutations. Optimal DHPLC partial denaturing conditions for mutation detection were established for each PCR amplicon corresponding to the seven alpha-Gal A exons and their adjacent intronic/flanking sequences. At least five known mutations in each exon (45 in total) were screened by DHPLC to validate the method. Mutation detection was then performed in 14 affected males diagnosed by enzyme assay and 39 at-risk females, and the amplicons with abnormal DHPLC profiles were sequenced. In all affected males, and in 32 of the 39 at-risk females, four and 16 previously reported and 10 and 15 new mutations were identified, respectively. Sequencing all seven alpha-Gal A gene amplicons in the seven at-risk females who had normal DHPLC profiles excluded them as mutation carriers. Only one mutation (p.P362L) was not initially identified by its DHPLC profile, but in retrospect the profile was abnormal, emphasizing the need for experience in inspecting the profiles. In addition, this technique detected two new intronic polymorphisms, c.640-16A>G and c.1000-22C>T, with frequencies of 0.14 and 0.25 in both normal individuals and Fabry patients, respectively. This DHPLC method should improve the rapidity and cost-effectiveness of alpha-Gal A mutation identification in affected males and carrier females for Fabry disease.",3
"Frequent mutations in Japanese patients with acid maltase deficiency. || Adolescent Adult Alleles DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Testing Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Japan Mutation || We screened 22 Japanese patients with acid maltase deficiency (seven with the infantile type, eight with the juvenile type and seven with the adult type) for three previously described mutations, D645E, S529V and R672Q, and a novel mutation, R600C. Although D645E has been reported to be common in Chinese patients with the infantile type, only three of 44 alleles (two of 14 infantile type alleles) from Japanese patients harbored the D645E mutation. The S529V mutation was identified in six of 14 alleles from adult-onset patients. None of the infantile or juvenile patients harbored the S529V mutation. Therefore, S529V apparently results in the adult type disease and is common in Japanese adult-onset patients. R672Q was identified in two pairs of siblings with the juvenile type. A novel mutation, R600C, was identified in eight of 22 patients (nine of 44 alleles). Therefore, R600C is another common Japanese mutation occurring at a CpG dinucleotide ""hot spot"". Homozygosity for this mutation apparently results in the infantile phenotype. Genetic diagnosis by detecting these four mutations might be feasible for most Japanese patients with acid maltase deficiency.",3 1
"Adult-onset glycogen storage disease type II: phenotypic and allelic heterogeneity in German patients. || Adult Age of Onset Alleles Alternative Splicing Amino Acid Sequence Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Heterogeneity Germany Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Introns Lysosomes Middle Aged Mutagenesis, Insertional Phenotype Point Mutation Sequence Deletion Sequence Homology, Amino Acid Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII, Pompe's disease) is an autosomal recessive inherited deficiency of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (GAA). Clinical as well as biochemical and allelic heterogeneity have been described in GSDII. We identified mutations within the GAA gene in seven unrelated German patients, six with adult- and one with juvenile-onset GSDII. Beside previously described mutations [IVS1 (-13T --> G), delta(exon) 18, C1634T], we characterized four new mutations of GSDII: IVS6 (-22T --> G), 271delG, G1912T (Gly638Trp), and 2432insC. The IVS6 (-22T --> G) mutation gives rise to aberrant splicing, causing inframe deletions of 25 or 40 amino acids within the GAA coding sequence and the insertion of a sequence of seven missense amino acids. Two affected siblings and an unrelated patient with adult GSDII are apparently homozygous for the exon 18 deletion. Both siblings are also heteroallelic for IVS1 (-13T --> G). In conclusion, we observed pronounced allelic heterogeneity and an unexpectedly high frequency of homozygosity for larger in-frame deletions within the GAA coding sequence in German adult-onset GSDII patients.",3 1 0
"De novo mutations in epileptic encephalopathies. || Child Development Disorders, Pervasive Cohort Studies Exome Female Fragile X Mental Retardation Protein Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Infant Intellectual Disability Lennox Gastaut Syndrome Male Mutation Mutation Rate N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferases Probability Receptors, GABA-A Spasms, Infantile || Epileptic encephalopathies are a devastating group of severe childhood epilepsy disorders for which the cause is often unknown. Here we report a screen for de novo mutations in patients with two classical epileptic encephalopathies: infantile spasms (n = 149) and Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (n = 115). We sequenced the exomes of 264 probands, and their parents, and confirmed 329 de novo mutations. A likelihood analysis showed a significant excess of de novo mutations in the ∼4,000 genes that are the most intolerant to functional genetic variation in the human population (P = 2.9 × 10(-3)). Among these are GABRB3, with de novo mutations in four patients, and ALG13, with the same de novo mutation in two patients; both genes show clear statistical evidence of association with epileptic encephalopathy. Given the relevant site-specific mutation rates, the probabilities of these outcomes occurring by chance are P = 4.1 × 10(-10) and P = 7.8 × 10(-12), respectively. Other genes with de novo mutations in this cohort include CACNA1A, CHD2, FLNA, GABRA1, GRIN1, GRIN2B, HNRNPU, IQSEC2, MTOR and NEDD4L. Finally, we show that the de novo mutations observed are enriched in specific gene sets including genes regulated by the fragile X protein (P < 10(-8)), as has been reported previously for autism spectrum disorders.",3
"Fabry Disease: prevalence of affected males and heterozygotes with pathogenic GLA mutations identified by screening renal, cardiac and stroke clinics, 1995-2017. ||  || Fabry Disease (FD), an X linked lysosomal storage disease due to pathogenic α-galactosidase A (GLA) mutations, results in two major subtypes, the early-onset Type 1 'Classic' and the Type 2 'Later-Onset' phenotypes. To identify previously unrecognised patients, investigators screened cardiac, renal and stroke clinics by enzyme assays. However, some screening studies did not perform confirmatoryGLA mutation analyses, and many included recently recognised 'benign/likely-benign' variants, thereby inflating prevalence estimates. Online databases were searched for all FD screening studies in high-risk clinics (1995-2017). Studies reporting GLA mutations were re-analysed for pathogenic mutations, sex and phenotype. Phenotype-specific and sex-specific prevalence rates were determined. Of 67 studies, 63 that screened 51363patients (33943M and 17420F) and provided GLA mutations were reanalysed for disease-causing mutations. Of reportedGLA mutations, benign variants occurred in 47.9% of males and 74.1% of females. The following were the revised prevalence estimates: among 36820 (23954M and 12866F) haemodialysis screenees, 0.21% males and 0.15% females; among 3074 (2031M and 1043F) renal transplant screenees, 0.25% males and no females; among 5491 (4054M and 1437F) cardiac screenees, 0.94% males and 0.90% females; and among 5978 (3904M and 2074F) stroke screenees, 0.13% males and 0.14% females. Among male and female screenees with pathogenic mutations, the type 1 Classic phenotype was predominant (~60%), except more male cardiac patients (75%) had type 2 Later-Onset phenotype. Compared with previous findings, reanalysis of 63 studies increased the screenee numbers (~3.4-fold), eliminated 20 benign/likely benign variants, and provided more accurate sex-specific and phenotype-specific prevalence estimates, ranging from ~0.13% of stroke to ~0.9% of cardiac male or female screenees.",3 4
"Two mutations within the coding sequence of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. || Alleles Base Sequence Exons Female Genetic Testing Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Sweden || Two previously unidentified mutations at the phenylalanine hydroxylase locus were found during a study of the relationship between genotype and phenotype in phenylketonuria and hyperphenylalaninemia. One mutation eliminates the BamHI site in exon 7 and the other eliminates the HindIII site in exon 11 of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. They were suspected because of deviating restriction fragment patterns and confirmed by amplification, via the polymerase chain reaction, of exon 7 and exon 11, respectively, followed by digestion with the appropriate restriction enzyme. Direct sequencing of amplified mutant exon 7 revealed a G/C to T/A transversion at the first base of codon 272, substituting a GGA glycine codon for a UGA stop codon. Direct sequencing of amplified mutant exon 11 revealed a deletion of codon 364, a CTT leucine codon. The exon 7 mutation can be expected to result in a truncated protein and the exon 11 mutation in the elimination of an amino acid in the catalytic region of the enzyme. A patient who is a compound heterozygote for these two mutations has classical phenylketonuria. It is concluded that each of the two mutations leads to a profound loss of enzymatic activity. The segregation of these mutations with disease alleles in 4 and 2 families, respectively, supports the hypothesis that multiple mutations at the phenylalanine hydroxylase locus explain the variable phenylalanine tolerance in patients with phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency.",3
"[Genetic and clinical study of three Chinese pedigrees with Fabry disease]. ||  || Fabry disease is a rare lysosome storage disease featuring X-linked recessive inheritance. The study was to explore potential mutations of alpha-galactosidase A (GLA) gene and their correlation with clinic manifestations in three Chinese pedigrees with Fabry disease. All exons and flanking sequences of GLA gene were amplified with PCR. Potential mutations were detected with bidirectional DNA sequencing. Correlation between particular mutations and clinic features were analyzed. A unreported missense mutation, c.797A>C (D266A) in GLA exon 5 was identified in pedigree 1. Also in exon 5, a missense mutation c.644A>G (N215S) was found in pedigree 2. In pedigree 3, a nonsense mutation c.355C>T (Q119X) was found in exon 2. The c.797A>C mutation was not detected in 200 unrelated male controls. The probands of pedigrees 1 and 3 had presented mainly with skin damage and chronic renal insufficiency, whilst the proband of pedigree 2 had presented with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The unreported c.797A>C (D266A) mutation is the sixth missense type mutation of the 266th codon of GLA gene, and all other 5 missense mutations reported previously had been confirmed to be responsible for Fabry disease. The c.797A>C mutation, not found in 200 unrelated male controls, may be the causative mutation in pedigree 1. The c.644A>G and c.355C>T mutations were first detected in Chinese patients. Variable phenotypes of Fabry disease may be in part attributed to the natures of particular mutations of GLA gene.",3 0
"Fabry disease: polymorphic haplotypes and a novel missense mutation in the GLA gene. || Adult Child Fabry Disease Female Haplotypes Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Phenotype alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease: polymorphic haplotypes and a novel missense mutation in the GLA gene. Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder with a heterogeneous spectrum of clinical manifestations that are caused by the deficiency of α-galactosidase A (α-Gal-A) activity. Although useful for diagnosis in males, enzyme activity is not a reliable biochemical marker in heterozygous females due to random X-chromosome inactivation, thus rendering DNA sequencing of the α-Gal-A gene, alpha-galactosidase gene (GLA), the most reliable test for the confirmation of diagnosis in females. The spectrum of GLA mutations is highly heterogeneous. Many polymorphic GLA variants have been described, but it is unclear if haplotypes formed by combinations of such variants correlate with FD, thus complicating molecular diagnosis in females with normal α-Gal-A activity. We tested 67 female probands with clinical manifestations that may be associated with FD and 110 control males with normal α-Gal-A activity. Five different combinations of GLA polymorphic variants were identified in 14 of the 67 females, whereas clearcut pathogenetic alterations, p.Met51Ile and p.Met290Leu, were identified in two cases. The latter has not been reported so far, and both mutant forms were found to be responsive to the pharmacological chaperone deoxygalactonojirimycin (DGJ; migalastat hydrochloride). Analysis of the male control population, as well as male relatives of a suspected FD female proband, permitted the identification of seven different GLA gene haplotypes in strong linkage disequilibrium. The identification of haplotypes in control males provides evidence against their involvement in the development of FD phenotypic manifestations.",3 4
"Is it Fabry disease? || Fabry Disease Humans Mutation Trihexosylceramides alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is caused by mutations in the GLA gene that lower α-galactosidase A activity to less than 25-30% of the mean normal level. Several GLA variants have been identified that are associated with relatively elevated residual α-galactosidase A. The challenge is to determine which GLA variants can cause clinical manifestations related to Fabry disease. Here, we review the various types of GLA variants and recommend that pathogenicity be considered only when associated with elevated globotriaosylceramide in disease-relevant organs and tissues as analyzed by mass spectrometry. This criterion is necessary to ensure that very costly and specific therapy is provided only when appropriate.Genet Med 18 12, 1181-1185.",3
"Fabry disease: thirty-five mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A gene in patients with classic and variant phenotypes. || Chromosome Mapping DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Fabry Disease Female Gene Rearrangement Genetic Carrier Screening Genotype Humans Infant Male Mutation Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction RNA Splicing alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease, an X-linked inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism, results from mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A) gene located at Xq22.1. To determine the nature and frequency of the molecular lesions causing the classical and milder variant Fabry phenotypes and for precise carrier detection, the alpha-Gal A lesions in 42 unrelated Fabry hemizygotes were determined. Genomic DNA was isolated from affected probands and their family members. The seven alpha-galactosidase A exons and flanking intronic sequences were PCR amplified and the nucleotide sequence was determined by solid-phase direct sequencing. Two patients with the mild cardiac phenotype had missense mutations, I9IT and F113L, respectively. In 38 classically affected patients, 33 new mutations were identified including 20 missense (MIT, A31V, H46R, Y86C, L89P, D92Y, C94Y, A97V, R100T, Y134S, G138R, A143T, S148R, G163V, D170V, C202Y, Y216D, N263S, W287C, and N298S), two nonsense (Q386X, W399X), one splice site mutation (IVS4 + 2T-->C), and eight small exonic insertions or deletions (304del1, 613del9, 777del1, 1057del2, 1074del2, 1077del1, 1212del3, and 1094ins1), which identified exon 7 as a region prone to gene rearrangements. In addition, two unique complex rearrangements consisting of contiguous small insertions and deletions were found in exons 1 and 2 causing L45R/H46S and L120X, respectively. These studies further define the heterogeneity of mutations causing Fabry disease, permit precise carrier identification and prenatal diagnosis in these families, and facilitate the identification of candidates for enzyme replacement therapy.",3
"Prevalence of Anderson-Fabry disease in male patients with late onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Cohort Studies Comorbidity DNA Mutational Analysis Echocardiography Electrocardiography Fabry Disease Humans Japan Male Middle Aged Mutation Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Prevalence Referral and Consultation United Kingdom alpha-Galactosidase || Although studies have suggested that ""late-onset"" hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) may be caused by sarcomeric protein gene mutations, the cause of HCM in the majority of patients is unknown. This study determined the prevalence of a potentially treatable cause of hypertrophy, Anderson-Fabry disease, in a HCM referral population. Plasma alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal) was measured in 79 men with HCM who were diagnosed at > or =40 years of age (52.9+/-7.7 years; range, 40-71 years) and in 74 men who were diagnosed at <40 years (25.9+/-9.2 years; range, 8-39 years). Five patients (6.3%) with late-onset disease and 1 patient (1.4%) diagnosed at <40 years had low alpha-Gal activity. Of these 6 patients, 3 had angina, 4 were in New York Heart Association class 2, 5 had palpitations, and 2 had a history of syncope. Hypertrophy was concentric in 5 patients and asymmetric in 1 patient. One patient had left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. All patients with low alpha-Gal activity had alpha-Gal gene mutations. Anderson-Fabry disease should be considered in all cases of unexplained hypertrophy. Its recognition is important given the advent of specific replacement enzyme therapy.",3
"Panel testing reveals nonsense and missense CDH1 mutations in families without hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. ||  || The reported penetrance of germline CDH1 mutations is high in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). Men and women have a 70% and 56%, respectively, cumulative risk of developing diffuse gastric cancer by age 80. Women additionally have a 42% cumulative risk of developing breast cancer. Due to the high penetrance of these mutations, prophylactic total gastrectomy is currently recommended for CDH1 mutation carriers. However, whether everyone with a CDH1 gene mutation is at risk for HDGC is not clear. Mutation identification was performed by next-generation sequencing. Mutations and variant status was confirmed by Sanger sequencing in 11 family members. We present two families with pathogenic CDH1 mutations. The first family carries a novel truncating, nonsense CDH1 mutation that we were able to trace for three generations, but reports no family history of diffuse gastric cancer. The occurrence of cancer in this family deviates significantly from the expectation for HDGC. The proband from the second family presents with breast cancer and carries a previously reported pathogenic CDH1 mutation, but also reports no family history of diffuse gastric cancer. Our study demonstrates the need for further analysis of CDH1 mutation penetrance in order to better counsel asymptomatic CDH1 mutation carriers on preventative measures and general care.",3
"Germline TP53 variants and susceptibility to osteosarcoma. || Adult Age of Onset Bone Neoplasms Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Osteosarcoma Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || The etiologic contribution of germline genetic variation to sporadic osteosarcoma is not well understood. Osteosarcoma is a sentinel cancer of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), in which approximately 70% of families meeting the classic criteria have germline TP53 mutations. We sequenced TP53 exons in 765 osteosarcoma cases. Data were analyzed with χ(2) tests, logistic regression, and Cox proportional hazards regression models. We observed a high frequency of young osteosarcoma cases (age <30 years) carrying a known LFS- or likely LFS-associated mutation (3.8%) or rare exonic variant (5.7%) with an overall frequency of 9.5%, compared with none in case patients age 30 years and older (P < .001). This high TP53 mutation prevalence in young osteosarcoma cases is statistically significantly greater than the previously reported prevalence of 3% (P = .0024). We identified a novel association between a TP53 rare variant and metastasis at diagnosis of osteosarcoma (rs1800372, odds ratio = 4.27, 95% confidence interval = 1.2 to 15.5, P = .026). Genetic susceptibility to young onset osteosarcoma is distinct from older adult onset osteosarcoma, with a high frequency of LFS-associated and rare exonic TP53 variants.",3
"Identification of a novel phenylketonuria (PKU) mutation in the Chinese: further evidence for multiple origins of PKU in Asia. || Alleles Asian Continental Ancestry Group Base Sequence China Gene Frequency Humans Introns Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias RNA Splicing RNA, Messenger || A novel mutation has been identified in the human phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene of a Chinese patient with classical phenylketonuria (PKU). It is a single base transition of G to A at the last base in intron 4 of the gene, which abolishes the 3'-acceptor site of the intron. Population screening indicates that this mutation constitutes about 8% of all PKU chromosomes in Chinese but is absent in Japanese and Caucasian PKU patients. It is prevalent in southern China but rare in northern China, providing additional evidence that there were multiple founding populations of PKU in east Asia.",3
"[Genetic diagnosis of phenylketonuria: identification of the mutations of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene by PCR direct sequencing]. ||  || To investigate the mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene in Orientals, direct sequencing was conducted on DNA fragments amplified by the polymerase chain reaction, using solid phase technology involving the biotin-streptavidin system. Four mutations possibly associated with phenylketonuria (PKU) were identified in a Chinese and four Japanese patients. A novel Arg158 (CGG)-to-Trp158 (TGG) mutation was identified in exon 5 of the PAH gene in a Chinese PKU patient. The second change was due to a G-to-A transversion at the last base of intron 4. The third change was a compound heterozygote; one mutation was a G-to-A transversion at the last base of intron 4. The other was a G-to-C transversion at the second base of codon 413, which resulted in a substitution of Arg(CGC) by Pro(CCC) in exon 12. The last change was due to a Tyr204(TAT) -to-cys204(TGT) mutation in exon 6 of the PAH gene in two Japanese. This preliminary study revealed a novel PKU mutation and considerable genetic heterogeneity in the PAH gene among Orientals.",3
"Mutation analysis of PAH gene and characterization of a recurrent deletion mutation in Korean patients with phenylketonuria. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Binding Sites DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Humans Korea Models, Molecular Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Protein Structure, Tertiary Sequence Deletion || Phenylketonuria (PKU; MIM 261600) is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder caused by a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH; EC 1.14.16.1). Point mutations in the PAH gene are known to cause PKU in various ethnic groups, and large deletions or duplications account for up to 3% of the PAH mutations in some ethnic groups. However, a previous study could not identify approximately 14% of the mutant alleles by sequence analysis in Korean patients with PKU, which suggests that large deletions or duplication might be frequent causes of PKU in Koreans. To test this hypothesis, we performed multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) for the identification of uncharacterized mutant alleles after PAH sequence analysis of 33 unrelated Korean patients with PKU. Bi-directional sequencing of the PAH exons and flanking intronic regions revealed 27 different mutations, including four novel mutations (two missense and two deletion mutations), comprising 57/66 (86%) mutant alleles. MLPA identified a large deletion that encompassed exons 5 and 6 in four patients, another large deletion that extended from exon 4 to exon 7 in one patient, and a duplication of exon 4 in one patient. Chromosomal walking characterized the deletion breakpoint of the most common large deletion that involved exons 5 and 6 (c.456_706+138del). The present study shows that the allelic frequency of exon deletion or duplication is 9% (6/66) in Korean PKU patients, which suggests that these mutations may be frequent causes of PKU in Korean subjects.",3 1
"Germline inactivation of PTEN and dysregulation of the phosphoinositol-3-kinase/Akt pathway cause human Lhermitte-Duclos disease in adults. || Adult Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Ganglioneuroma Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Humans Immunohistochemistry Infant Male Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Proto-Oncogene Proteins Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt Signal Transduction Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Lhermitte-Duclos disease (LDD), or dysplastic gangliocytoma of the cerebellum, is an unusual hamartomatous overgrowth disorder. LDD can be familial or, more commonly, sporadic. It has been only recently recognized that LDD may be associated with Cowden syndrome (CS). Over 80% of patients with CS carry germline mutations in PTEN. It remains unclear whether all cases of LDD, even without features of CS, are caused by germline PTEN mutation and whether somatic PTEN mutation occurs in sporadic LDD. We obtained paraffin-embedded LDD lesions from 18 unselected, unrelated patients and performed mutational analysis of PTEN. Overall, 15 (83%) of 18 samples were found to carry a PTEN mutation. All individuals with mutations were adult-onset patients, but the three without mutations were diagnosed at the ages of 1, 3, and 11 years. Germline DNA was available from six adult-onset cases, and all had germline PTEN mutations. Of these six, two had CS features, one did not have CS features, and three were of unknown CS status. Immunohistochemistry revealed that 75% of the LDD samples had complete or partial loss of PTEN expression accompanied by elevated phosphorylated Akt, specifically in the dysplastic gangliocytoma cells. These data suggest that the loss of PTEN function is sufficient to cause LDD. The high frequency and spectrum of germline PTEN mutations in patients ascertaining by LDD alone confirm that LDD is an important defining feature of CS. Individuals with LDD, even without apparent CS features, should be counseled as in CS.",3
"Co-existence of phenylketonuria either with maple syrup urine disease or Sandhoff disease in two patients from Iran: emphasizing the role of consanguinity. || Adult Amino Acid Sequence Biomarkers Consanguinity Female Genetic Testing Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Iran Male Maple Syrup Urine Disease Metabolism, Inborn Errors Mutation Pedigree Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Sandhoff Disease Sequence Homology, Amino Acid beta-Hexosaminidase beta Chain || Most inborn errors of metabolism (IEMs) are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. IEMs are one of the major concerns in Iran due to its extensive consanguineous marriages. Herein, we report two patients with two co-existent IEMs: a girl affected by classic phenylketonuria (PKU) and maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) and a male patient affected with Sandhoff disease and PKU, where Sandhoff disease was suspected due to the presence of a cherry-red spot in the eyes at 6 months which is unrelated to PKU. Sequencing of candidate genes in the first patient revealed one novel and three recurrent compound heterozygous mutations of p.Ser231Pro and p.Ala300Ser in the PAH gene and p.Glu330Lys and p.Arg170Cys mutations in the BCKDHB gene. Genetic testing results in the second patient showed previously reported homozygous mutations of p.Arg261Gln in the PAH and p.Arg533Cys mutation in the HEXB gene. Genetic testing confirmed the clinical diagnosis of both diseases in both patients. To the best of our knowledge; this is the first report of the co-existence of two distinct genetic disorders in two individuals from Iran. Co-existent different IEMs in patients complicated the clinical diagnosis and management of the diseases.",3
"Belgian Fabry study: prevalence of Fabry disease in a cohort of 1000 young patients with cerebrovascular disease. || Adolescent Adult Age Factors Belgium Cerebrovascular Disorders Cohort Studies Fabry Disease Female Humans Male Middle Aged Prevalence Prospective Studies Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Data on the prevalence of Fabry disease in patients with central nervous system pathology are limited and controversial. In this study, we assessed the prevalence of Fabry disease in young patients presenting with cerebrovascular disease in Belgium. In this national, prospective, multicenter study, we screened for Fabry disease in 1000 patients presenting with ischemic stroke, transient ischemic attack, or intracranial hemorrhage; unexplained white matter lesions; or vertebrobasilar dolichoectasia. In male patients, we measured alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-GAL A) activity in dried blood spots. Female patients were screened for mutations by exonic DNA sequencing of the alpha-GAL A gene. alpha-GAL A activity was deficient in 19 men (3.5%), although all had normal alpha-GAL A gene sequences. Enzymatic deficiency was confirmed on repeat assessment in 2 male patients (0.4%). We identified missense mutations in 8 unrelated female patients (1.8%): Asp313Tyr (n=5), Ala143Thr (n=2), and Ser126Gly (n=1). The pathogenicity of the 2 former missense mutations is controversial. Ser126Gly is a novel mutation that can be linked to late-onset Fabry disease. alpha-GAL A deficiency may play a role in up to 1% of young patients presenting with cerebrovascular disease. These findings suggest that atypical variants of Fabry disease with late-onset cerebrovascular disease exist, although the clinical relevance is unclear in all cases.",3
"PKU in Minas Gerais State, Brazil: mutation analysis. ||  || This work was undertaken in order to ascertain the PKU mutational spectrum in Minas Gerais, Brazil, the relative frequency of the mutations in the State and the origin of these mutations by haplotype determination. Minas Gerais is a trihybrid population formed by miscegenation from Europeans, Africans and Amerindians. All 13 exons of the PAH gene from 78 PKU patients were analyzed, including splicing sites and the promoter region. We identified 30 different mutations and 98% of the PAH alleles were established. A new mutation (Q267X) was identified as well. The most common mutations found were V388M (21.2), R261Q (16.0%), IVS10-11G>A (15.3%), I65T (5.8%), IVS2+5G>C (5.8%), R252W (5.1%), IVS2+5G>A (4.5%), P281L (3.8%) and L348V (3.2%). These nine mutations correspond to 80% of the PKU alleles in the state. Haplotypes were determined to characterize the origin of the PAH alleles. The majority of the mutations found, with respective haplotypes, are frequent in the Iberian Peninsula. However, there were some mutations that are rare in Europe and four previously unreported mutation-haplotype associations. I65T and Q267X were found in association with haplotype 38 and may be African in origin or the result of miscegenation in the Brazilian population.",3
"Molecular epidemiology of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Southern Italy: a 96% detection rate with ten novel mutations. ||  || Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) comprises a group of autosomal recessive disorders mainly caused by phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene mutations. We investigated PAH mutations in 126 HPA patients from Southern Italy who were identified in a neonatal screening program. The promoter, coding and exon-flanking intronic sequences of the PAH gene were amplified and sequenced. Mutations were identified in 240/249 alleles (detection rate: 96.4%). We found 60 gene variants; the most frequent were p.R261Q (15.7% of alleles), p.A403V (11.6% of alleles) and c.1066-11G > A (8.8% of alleles). The remaining mutations were rare, and ten are novel. This mutation epidemiology differs from that reported for Northern Italy and other European countries. We also identified several discordant genotype/phenotype correlations. About two-thirds of all mild phenylketonuria patients showed at least one tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)-responsive mutation, and are thus candidates for a customized therapeutic approach.",3
"Proteasome Inhibitor Bortezomib Enhances the Activity of Multiple Mutant Forms of Lysosomal α-Glucosidase in Pompe Disease. ||  || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive myopathic disorder caused by the deficiency of lysosomal acid α-glucosidase (GAA). Recently, we showed that function of mutant GAA in fibroblasts derived from Pompe disease patient carrying c.546G>T mutation is improved by treatment with proteasome inhibitor bortezomib as well as pharmacological chaperone (PC). However, bortezomib-responsive GAA mutations are not fully characterized. In this study, we showed the effect of bortezomib on different mutants of GAA in patient fibroblasts and transiently expressed HEK293T cells. Bortezomib increased the maturation and residual activity of GAA in patient fibroblasts carrying PC-responsive M519V and PC-unresponsive C647W mutations. Enhanced colocalization of GAA with lysosomal marker LAMP2 was also observed in patient fibroblasts after treatment with bortezomib. When four distinct mutant GAAs, which show different response to PC, were overexpressed in HEK293T cells, bortezomib improved the activity of M519V, S529V, and C647W in them (1.3-5.9-fold). These results indicate that bortezomib enhances the activity of some PC-unresponsive GAA mutants as well as PC-responsive mutants.",3
"Mutational spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in the population resident in Catalonia: genotype-phenotype correlation. ||  || Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) is a group of diseases characterized by the persistent elevation of phenylalanine levels in tissues and biological fluids. It is an autosomal recessive disorder affecting 1 in 10,000 individuals in Caucasian populations and about 1 in 6,600 in Catalonia. We report the mutational spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in the population living in Catalonia and the genotype-phenotype correlation. The molecular study was performed in 383 samples corresponding to 115 patients from 99 unrelated families and 268 relatives. We have characterized 90% of the mutant alleles; there were 57 different mutations, 49 of which have previously been described, 8 being novel mutations and two being large deletions. The 57 mutations detected corresponded to: five nonsense, seven frameshift, and eight splice defects, the remainder being missense mutations. These mutations cause 72 different genotypes in the 83 families characterized, confirming the mutational heterogeneity of phenylketonuria (PKU) in the Mediterranean population. According to our biochemical classification, our HPA population is composed of 40 PKU (35%), 36 variant PKU (31%), and 39 non-PKU HPA (34%). Mutations such as IVS 10, A403 V, and E390G correlated as expected with the phenotype and the predicted residual activity in vitro. However, in four cases (165 T, V388 M, R261Q, and Y414 C), the observed metabolic phenotype was not consistent with the predicted genotypic effect. The identification of the mutations in the PAH gene and the genotype-phenotype correlation should facilitate the evaluation of metabolic phenotypes, diagnosis, implementation of optimal dietary therapy, and determination of prognosis in the patients and genetic counselling for the patient's relatives.",3
Five novel missense mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in phenylketonuria. ||  || ,3 1
"Variant manifestation of Cowden disease in Japan: hamartomatous polyposis of the digestive tract with mutation of the PTEN gene. || Adult Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10 Female Genes, Tumor Suppressor Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Japan Male PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Tumor Suppressor Proteins || ",3
"A Japanese patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome who had nine primary malignancies associated with a germline mutation of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene. || Adolescent Female Genes, p53 Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Mutation, Missense Neoplasms Pedigree || We describe a patient who had nine primary malignant tumors and a germline mutation in the p53 tumor-suppressor gene, characteristically found in the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). A 15-year-old girl with no family history of cancer was referred to our hospital because of pain and swelling of the right knee. Osteosarcoma was diagnosed. The patient received chemotherapy followed by surgery and had a remission. After the age of 28 years, nine primary malignant tumors developed successively, including right breast cancer, colon cancer, malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH) of the abdominal wall, right lung double cancers, bilateral breast cancers, and MFH of the left thigh. This is the second highest number of types of primary malignant tumors to be reported in LFS. All tumors were treated by a multidisciplinary approach, including surgery. Genetic analysis revealed a germline missense mutation in the p53 gene (c.659 A > G), resulting in Y220C, which has been reported in three families with LFS. The patient died of lung metastasis from MFH at the age of 37 years. Despite the multiple tumors, repeated induction of remissions resulted in long survival. Our findings suggest that a multidisciplinary approach to treatment, including surgery, is beneficial in patients with LFS.",3
"Sacral agenesis: a pilot whole exome sequencing and copy number study. || Abnormalities, Multiple Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Clathrin Heavy Chains DNA DNA Copy Number Variations High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Homozygote Humans Meningocele Neoplasm Proteins Phenotype Pilot Projects Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Sacrococcygeal Region Sequence Analysis, DNA || Caudal regression syndrome (CRS) or sacral agenesis is a rare congenital disorder characterized by a constellation of congenital caudal anomalies affecting the caudal spine and spinal cord, the hindgut, the urogenital system, and the lower limbs. CRS is a complex condition, attributed to an abnormal development of the caudal mesoderm, likely caused by the effect of interacting genetic and environmental factors. A well-known risk factor is maternal type 1 diabetes. Whole exome sequencing and copy number variation (CNV) analyses were conducted on 4 Caucasian trios to identify de novo and inherited rare mutations. In this pilot study, exome sequencing and copy number variation (CNV) analyses implicate a number of candidate genes, including SPTBN5, MORN1, ZNF330, CLTCL1 and PDZD2. De novo mutations were found in SPTBN5, MORN1 and ZNF330 and inherited predicted damaging mutations in PDZD2 (homozygous) and CLTCL1 (compound heterozygous). Importantly, predicted damaging mutations in PTEN (heterozygous), in its direct regulator GLTSCR2 (compound heterozygous) and in VANGL1 (heterozygous) were identified. These genes had previously been linked with the CRS phenotype. Two CNV deletions, one de novo (chr3q13.13) and one homozygous (chr8p23.2), were detected in one of our CRS patients. These deletions overlapped with CNVs previously reported in patients with similar phenotype. Despite the genetic diversity and the complexity of the phenotype, this pilot study identified genetic features common across CRS patients.",2 3
"The metabolic and molecular bases of tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. || Biopterin Genotype Humans Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || About two-thirds of all mild phenylketonuria (PKU) patients are tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)-responsive and thus can be potentially treated with BH4 instead of a low-phenylalanine diet. Although there has been an increase in the amount of information relating to the diagnosis and treatment of this new variant of PKU, very little is know about the mechanisms of BH4-responsiveness. This review will focus on laboratory investigations and possible molecular and structural mechanisms involved in this process.",3
"Newborn screening for Fabry disease in Taiwan reveals a high incidence of the later-onset GLA mutation c.936+919G>A (IVS4+919G>A). ||  || Fabry disease (alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A, GLA) deficiency) is a panethnic inborn error of glycosphingolipid metabolism. Because optimal therapeutic outcomes depend on early intervention, a pilot program was designed to assess newborn screening for this disease in 171,977 consecutive Taiwanese newborns by measuring their dry blood spot (DBS) alpha-Gal A activities and beta-galactosidase/alpha-Gal A ratios. Of the 90,288 male screenees, 638 (0.7%) had DBS alpha-Gal A activity <30% of normal mean and/or activity ratios >10. A second DBS assay reduced these to 91 (0.1%). Of these, 11 (including twins) had <5% (Group-A), 64 had 5-30% (Group-B), and 11 had >30% (Group-C) of mean normal leukocyte alpha-Gal A activity. All 11 Group-A, 61 Group-B, and 1 Group-C males had GLA gene mutations. Surprisingly, 86% had the later-onset cryptic splice mutation c.936+919G>A (also called IVS4+919G>A). In contrast, screening 81,689 females detected two heterozygotes. The novel mutations were expressed in vitro, predicting their classical or later-onset phenotypes. Newborn screening identified a surprisingly high frequency of Taiwanese males with Fabry disease (approximately 1 in 1,250), 86% having the IVS4+919G>A mutation previously found in later-onset cardiac phenotype patients. Further studies of the IVS4 later-onset phenotype will determine its natural history and optimal timing for therapeutic intervention.",3 4 0
"Effect of enzyme therapy in juvenile patients with Pompe disease: a three-year open-label study. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Muscle, Skeletal Recombinant Proteins Treatment Outcome || Pompe disease is a rare neuromuscular disorder caused by deficiency of acid α-glucosidase. Treatment with recombinant human α-glucosidase recently received marketing approval based on prolonged survival of affected infants. The current open-label study was performed to evaluate the response in older children (age 5.9-15.2 years). The five patients that we studied had limb-girdle muscle weakness and three of them also had decreased pulmonary function in upright and supine position. They received 20-mg/kg recombinant human α-glucosidase every two weeks over a 3-year period. No infusion-associated reactions were observed. Pulmonary function remained stable (n = 4) or improved slightly (n = 1). Muscle strength increased. Only one patient approached the normal range. Patients obtained higher scores on the Quick Motor Function Test. None of the patients deteriorated. Follow-up data of two unmatched historical cohorts of adults and children with Pompe disease were used for comparison. They showed an average decline in pulmonary function of 1.6% and 5% per year. Data on muscle strength and function of untreated children were not available. Further studies are required.",3 1
"PKU mutations R408Q and F299C in Norway: haplotype associations, geographic distributions and phenotype characteristics. || Adolescent Adult Base Sequence Child Child, Preschool DNA Restriction Enzymes Exons Female Gene Frequency Haplotypes Humans Infant Male Molecular Sequence Data Norway Pedigree Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic || Details are given concerning the phenylketonuria (PKU) mutations R408Q and F299C. Both mutations were identified among 47 PKU patients, derived from the Norwegian PKU registry. A novel PKU mutation (R408Q) was identified, by single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis, on six out of eight mutant haplotype 12 chromosomes and on none of the other PKU chromosomes. The F299C mutation occurred exclusively on mutant haplotype 8, and was the only mutation associated with this haplotype (on six chromosomes). One patient homozygous for each mutation was found. The patient homozygous for F299C manifested severe PKU, whereas the R408Q homozygote exhibited a mild PKU variant. Pedigree analysis of these families has not, so far, revealed consanguinity. Information on the place of birth of the relevant grandparents of the PKU patients with these mutations suggests that each of these mutations in Norway has originated from a common gene source.",3 1
"Two novel genetic lesions and a common BH4-responsive mutation of the PAH gene in Italian patients with hyperphenylalaninemia. || DNA Mutational Analysis Humans Italy Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA), due to a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) enzyme, is caused by mutations in the PAH gene. Molecular analysis in 23 Italian patients with PAH deficiency identified two novel (P281R, L287V) and 20 previously described genetic lesions in the PAH gene. The detection of the A403V amino acid substitution in combination with null mutations in patients with BH4-responsive PAH deficiency leads us to correlate it with BH4 responsiveness.",3 1
"Single-strand conformation polymorphism for detection of mutations and base substitutions in phenylketonuria. || Base Sequence DNA DNA, Single-Stranded Exons Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic || In the past few years, more than 20 different mutations have been reported in hyperphenylalaninemias. In southwestern Europe and Mediterranean countries, however, the mutant genotypes reported account for only a fraction (27%) of all mutant alleles at the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) locus, and most of the mutations causing the disease remain unknown. In order to develop a strategy for rapid detection of mutation-containing exons, we applied the single-strand conformation-polymorphism (SSCP) technique to exons 3, 5, 7, and 12 of the PAH gene. We observed five abnormal patterns of migration in mutant PAH genes, and we consistently found base substitutions in the corresponding exons, with no false-positive results. By this procedure, two novel putative mutations were detected in the seventh exon of the PAH gene, (A259V and Y277D) and we were able to demonstrate that the delta I94, R158Q, R408W, and E280K mutations were easily detectable by the SSCP technique. This procedure is therefore of particular interest for rapid detection of mutation-containing exons and for determination of further genotype-phenotype correlations in hyperphenylalaninemias.",2 1 3
"A preliminary mutation analysis of phenylketonuria in southwest Iran. ||  || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a heterogeneous and autosomal recessive metabolic disorder that is mainly caused by mutations in the hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. This study was designed to identify PAH mutations within exons 6, 7, and 10-12 in PKU patients from southwest Iran. Forty Iranian patients with clinical and biochemically confirmed PKU were enrolled. The exons were sequenced directly and 13 different mutations were identified including I224T, S231P, R176X, c.592_613del22, R243X, R252W, R261Q, Y356X, V388M, IVS10-11G>A, IVS11+1G>C, IVS11-2A>G, and Q375R, which were associated with 23 genotypes. A novel sequence variant, Q375R (c.1124A>G), was detected in exon 11. In one patient, a typical genotype with more than two mutations (R243X/S231P/S231P) was found. Seven different polymorphisms and three new variants were also detected in intron regions of PAH. A high mutation spectrum was predicted in the southwestern region of Iran due to its ethnic heterogeneity, especially the Khuzestan Province. The detection of 13 different mutations, corresponding to a mutation detection rate of 53.75%, confirmed this phenomenon.",3
"Germline CDH1 mutations in bilateral lobular carcinoma in situ. || Antigens, CD Base Sequence Breast Neoplasms Cadherins Carcinoma in Situ Carcinoma, Lobular Female Germ-Line Mutation Humans Middle Aged Sequence Analysis, DNA || Invasive lobular breast cancer (ILC) and lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) are characterised by loss of E-cadherin expression. However germline CDH1 mutations are rare in cases of ILC with no family history of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) and have not been described in women with LCIS. We screened the CDH1 gene in 50 cases of bilateral LCIS/ILC using Sanger sequencing and MLPA. Sanger sequencing revealed four pathogenic germline mutations, including a novel splicing mutation (c.48+1G>A). The remaining three (c.1465insC, c.1942G>T, c.2398delC) have been previously described. All four cases had bilateral LCIS +/- ILC and no family history of gastric cancer. CDH1 germline mutations have not been previously described in women with LCIS. We have shown that germline CDH1 mutations are associated with early onset of bilateral LCIS with or without ILC in women without a family history of gastric cancer. CDH1 mutation screening should be considered in women with early onset of bilateral LCIS/ILC with no family history of HDGC.",3 4
"Extended phenotype description and new molecular findings in late onset glycogen storage disease type II: a northern Italy population study and review of the literature. || Adult Age of Onset Cohort Studies Community Health Planning DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Italy Male Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal Mutation Phenotype Statistics as Topic alpha-Glucosidases beta-Glucosidase || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII) is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by acid alpha-1,4-glucosidase deficiency and associated with recessive mutations in its coding gene GAA. Few studies have provided so far a detailed phenotypical characterization in late onset GSDII (LO-GSDII) patients. Genotype-phenotype correlation has been previously attempted with controversial results. We aim to provide an in-depth description of a cohort (n = 36) of LO-GSDII patients coming from the north of Italy and compare our population's findings to the literature. We performed a clinical record-based retrospective and prospective study of our patients. LO-GSDII in our cohort covers a large variability of phenotype including subtle clinical presentation and did not differ significantly from previous data. In all patients, molecular analysis disclosed GAA mutations, five of them being novel. To assess potential genotype-phenotype correlations we divided IVS1-32-13T>G heterozygous patients into two groups following the severity of the mutations on the second allele. Our patients harbouring ""severe"" mutations (n = 21) presented a strong tendency to have more severe phenotypes and more disability, more severe phenotypes and more disability, higher prevalence of assisted ventilation and a shorter time of evolution to show it. The determination of prognostic factors is mandatory in order to refine the accuracy of prognostic information, to develop follow-up strategy and, more importantly, to improve the decision algorithm for enzyme replacement therapy administration. The demonstration of genotype-phenotype correlations could help to reach this objective. Clinical assessment homogeneity is required to overcome limitations due to the lack of power of most studies.",3 1
"Molecular analysis of phenylketonuria (PKU) in newborns from Texas. ||  || This study describes the mutations at the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) locus in patients with the diagnosis of classic PKU (n=18), hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) variant (n=9) and benign persistent hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) (n=13) who were identified by the Texas Newborn Screening Program. Blinded studies were done by sequencing of the 13 exons and exon-intron boundaries of the PAH gene in genomic DNA isolated from dry blood spots. Thirty-six different mutations, including 25 missense mutations, six splice mutations, three deletions and two nonsense mutations were detected in 75 of the 80 mutant alleles (94%). The prevalent mutations were R408W (19%), V388M and IVS10nt-11g->a (6% each), Y414C (5%) and H170D, A403V, T380M and IVS7nt1g->a (4% each). Two novel missense mutations were identified in exon 5 (H170D and N167S). There was genotype/phenotype correlation in 33/40 cases (83%). For this population, exons 12, 11, 7, 5 and 8, which carry 78% of the mutations, would have to be screened first. However, the other exons must be studied when either one or no mutations are found in the primary screening. Hum Mutat 17:523, 2001.",3 1
"Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome: further delineation of the phenotype and management of PTEN mutation-positive cases. || Adult Child Child, Preschool Craniofacial Abnormalities Developmental Disabilities Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Intestinal Polyps Male PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phenotype Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Pigmentation Disorders Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS) is characterised by macrocephaly, intestinal hamartomatous polyps, lipomas, pigmented maculae of the glans penis, developmental delay and mental retardation. The syndrome follows an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. In 1997 reports on two BRRS patients with a deletion at 10q23.2-q24.1 were published. In the same year, the first two families with BRRS and a mutation of the PTEN gene were reported. Mutations in the PTEN gene have also been demonstrated in patients with Cowden syndrome (CS), which shows partial clinical overlap with BRRS, and in families with cases both of BRRS and CS. PTEN mutation positive BRRS and CS are likely to be different phenotypic presentations of the same syndrome. If BRRS and CS are one single condition, the question arises whether patients with BRRS should be screened for malignant tumours, since patients with Cowden syndrome have an increased risk of breast, endometrial, thyroid and renal cancer. We present two isolated cases and one family and confirm that BRRS and CS are allelic. Furthermore, we review the PTEN mutation positive BRRS cases, to further delineate the phenotype and to compare the cases with a genomic deletion with the cases with a point mutation. We recommend offering BRRS cases with a mutation in PTEN the same surveillance protocol for (malignant) tumours as is currently recommended for CS. In addition, we propose a yearly haemoglobin test from early infancy for the early detection of intestinal hamartomas, which are likely to give severe complications, especially in BRRS cases.",3
"Functional and structural characterization of novel mutations and genotype-phenotype correlation in 51 phenylalanine hydroxylase deficient families from Southern Italy. || Adolescent Adult Amino Acid Sequence Child Child, Preschool Dihydropteridine Reductase Female Genotype Humans Italy Male Models, Molecular Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Protein Conformation || Hyperphenylalaninemia (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database: 261600) is an autosomal recessive disorder mainly due to mutations in the gene for phenylalanine hydroxylase; the most severe form of hyperphenylalaninemia is classic phenylketonuria. We sequenced the entire gene for phenylalanine hydroxylase in 51 unrelated hyperphenylalaninemia patients from Southern Italy. The entire locus was genotyped in 46 out of 51 hyperphenylalaninemia patients, and 32 different disease-causing mutations were identified. The pathologic nature of two novel gene variants, namely, c.707-2delA and p.Q301P, was demonstrated by in vitro studies. c.707-2delA is a splicing mutation that involves the accepting site of exon 7; it causes the complete skipping of exon 7 and results in the truncated p.T236MfsX60 protein. The second gene variant, p.Q301P, has very low residual enzymatic activity (approximately 4.4%), which may be ascribed, in part, to a low expression level (8-10%). Both the decreased enzyme activity and the low expression level are supported by analysis of the 3D structure of the molecule. The putative structural alterations induced by p.Q301P are compatible with protein instability and perturbance of monomer interactions within dimers and tetramers, although they do not affect the catalytic site. In vivo studies showed tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness in the p.Q301P carrier but not in the c.707-2delA carrier. We next investigated genotype-phenotype correlations and found that genotype was a good predictor of phenotype in 76% of patients. However, genotype-phenotype discordance occurred in approximately 25% of our patients, mainly those bearing mutations p.L48S, p.R158Q, p.R261Q and p.P281L.",3 1
"Mutation spectrum of the PAH gene in the PKU patients from Khorasan Razavi province of Iran. || Base Sequence Consanguinity DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Female Genetic Association Studies Homozygote Humans Iran Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Characterization of the molecular basis of phenylketonuria (PKU) in North-east of Iran has been accomplished through the analysis of 62 unrelated chromosomes from 31 Iranian PKU patients. Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene mutations have been analyzed by direct DNA sequencing exons 6, 7, 10 and 11. A mutation detection rate of 74% was achieved. Eleven different mutations were found, with the most frequent mutation, IVS10-11G>A, accounting for 19% of Khorasan-Razavi PKU alleles. Ten mutations (R176X, E280K, IVS11+1G>C, S231P, Q383X, R243X, I224T, E390G, R252W and P281L) represent the rest PKU chromosomes. One novel mutation, Q383X in the homozygote form was identified which is located in the catalytic domain (residues143-410). With this high detection rate of mutations in North-east of Iran, new strategy for carrier testing could be DNA sequencing of these four exons. The other exons and boundaries will be studied only when either one or no mutations are detected in the initial screen.",3 1
"Response of 33 UK patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease to enzyme replacement therapy. ||  || Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) for infantile-onset Pompe disease has been commercially available for almost 10 years. We report the experience of its use in a cohort treated at three specialist lysosomal treatment centres in the UK. A retrospective case-note review was performed, with additional data being gathered from two national audits on all such patients treated with ERT. The impact on the outcome of various characteristics, measured just prior to the initiation of ERT (baseline), was evaluated using logistic regression. Thirty-three patients were identified; 13/29 (45%) were cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM) negative, and nine were immunomodulated. At baseline assessment, 79% were in heart failure, 66% had failure to thrive and 70% had radiological signs of focal pulmonary collapse. The overall survival rate was 60%, ventilation-free survival was 40% and 30% of patients were ambulatory. Median follow-up of survivors was 4 years, 1.5 months (range 6 months to 13.5 years). As with previous studies, the CRIM status impacted on all outcome measures. However, in this cohort, baseline failure to thrive was related to death and lack of ambulation, and left ventricular dilatation was a risk factor for non-ventilator-free survival. The outcome of treated patients remains heterogeneous despite attempts at immunomodulation. Failure to thrive at baseline and left ventricular dilation appear to be associated with poorer outcomes.",3 1
"Atypical immunologic response in a patient with CRIM-negative Pompe disease. || Cross Reactions Enzyme Replacement Therapy Fatal Outcome Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant, Newborn Pregnancy Prenatal Diagnosis Recombinant Proteins Serologic Tests Treatment Failure alpha-Glucosidases || We report the clinical course of a patient with severe infantile onset Pompe disease [cross-reactive immunologic material (CRIM) negative, R854X/R854X] who was diagnosed prenatally and received standard dosing of alglucosidase alfa (Myozyme®) enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) from day 10 of life until she passed away at the age of 3 years 9 months. In the immediate neonatal period there was cardiomegaly on chest X-ray, cardiac hypertrophy by echocardiogram, and development of a wide complex tachycardia. CRIM negative (CN) status was suspected based on her family history, and the available data at the time indicated that CN patients had limited survival even with ERT. However, given the opportunity for very early treatment, the treating provider and family elected to initiate treatment with ERT, without immune modulation. By 9 months of age echocardiogram was normal. Early motor development was within normal limits but by 2 years of age her developmental progress had slowed. She seroconverted by the 4th month of ERT, and anti-rhGAA antibody titers peaked at 25,600 in the 27th month. Immunomodulatory therapy was considered but declined by family. She acquired Influenza A at 2 years 6 months, which led to a prolonged hospitalization with invasive respiratory support, and placement of tracheostomy and gastrostomy tube. Her developmental progress ceased, and she died suddenly at home from a presumed cardiac event at age 3 years 9 months. The poor outcomes observed in CN patients have been attributed to the development of high sustained antibody titers. Although this CN patient's anti-rhGAA response was elevated and sustained, it is unlike any of the 3 patterns that have been previously described: high titer CN, high titer CRIM positive (HTCP), and low titer CP (LTCP) patients. This patient's clinical course, with achievement of 24 months of motor gains, 30 months of ventilator-free survival and 45 month survival, is like that of only a fraction of ERT treated CN patients, yet it is identical to other reported CN patients in its relentless progression and early fatality. The immunologic response (moderate sustained antibody titers) described here has not been previously reported and may have played a role in the overall pattern of developmental decline. In light of proposed universal newborn screening for Pompe disease, there is an urgent need for improved understanding of the interplay between immunologic responses to the only available treatment, ERT, and the relentless nature of this disease in CN patients.",3 1
"Inactivation of phenylalanine hydroxylase by a missense mutation, R270S, in a Palestinian kinship with phenylketonuria. || Base Sequence DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Ethnic Groups Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction || ",3 0
"Alpha-Galactosidase A p.A143T, a non-Fabry disease-causing variant. || Adult Fabry Disease Female Genotype Humans Ischemic Attack, Transient Male Middle Aged Mutation Mutation, Missense Retrospective Studies Stroke alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked multisystemic disorder with a heterogeneous phenotype. Especially atypical or late-onset type 2 phenotypes present a therapeutical dilemma. To determine the clinical impact of the alpha-Galactosidase A (GLA) p.A143T/ c.427G > A variation, we retrospectively analyzed 25 p.A143T patients in comparison to 58 FD patients with other missense mutations. p.A143T patients suffering from stroke/ transient ischemic attacks had slightly decreased residual GLA activities, and/or increased lyso-Gb3 levels, suspecting FD. However, most male p.A143T patients presented with significant residual GLA activity (~50 % of reference), which was associated with normal lyso-Gb3 levels. Additionally, p.A143T patients showed less severe FD-typical symptoms and absent FD-typical renal and cardiac involvement in comparison to FD patients with other missense mutations. Two tested female p.A143T patients with stroke/TIA did not show skewed X chromosome inactivation. No accumulation of neurologic events in family members of p.A143T patients with stroke/transient ischemic attacks was observed. We conclude that GLA p.A143T seems to be most likely a neutral variant or a possible modifier instead of a disease-causing mutation. Therefore, we suggest that p.A143T patients with stroke/transient ischemic attacks of unknown etiology should be further evaluated, since the diagnosis of FD is not probable and subsequent ERT or chaperone treatment should not be an unreflected option.",2 0 3
"Fabry disease presenting as apical left ventricular hypertrophy in a patient carrying the missense mutation R118C. || Fabry Disease Female Humans Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular Middle Aged Mutation, Missense alpha-Galactosidase || Anderson-Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by abnormalities of the GLA gene, which encodes the enzyme α-galactosidase A. A deficiency of this enzyme leads to the lysosomal accumulation of glycosphingolipids, which may cause left ventricular hypertrophy that is typically concentric and symmetric. We present the case of a 60-year-old woman with symptoms of dyspnea, atypical chest pain and palpitations, in whom a transthoracic echocardiogram revealed an apical variant of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Analysis of specific sarcomeric genetic mutations was negative. The patient underwent a screening protocol for Anderson-Fabry disease, using a dried blood spot test, which was standard at our institution for patients with left ventricular hypertrophy. The enzymatic activity assay revealed reduced α-galactosidase A enzymatic activity. Molecular analysis identified a missense point mutation in the GLA gene (p.R118C). This case report shows that Anderson-Fabry disease may cause an apical form of left ventricular hypertrophy. The diagnosis was only achieved because of systematic screening, which highlights the importance of screening for Anderson-Fabry disease in patients with unexplained left ventricular hypertrophy, including those presenting with more unusual patterns, such as apical variants of left ventricular hypertrophy. This case also supports the idea that the missense mutation R118C is indeed a true pathogenic mutation of Anderson-Fabry disease.",3
"Estimate of de novo mutation frequency in probands with PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome. ||  || PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder with increased risks of neoplasias, macrocephaly, and developmental disabilities. While both familial and sporadic cases exist, actual de novo mutation frequency remains unknown. We sought to estimate this within our PTEN-mutation positive patient series. Patients were prospectively accrued if they had known pathogenic germline PTEN mutations or phenotypic features suspicious for PHTS. Only families with pathogenic PTEN mutations were included. Likelihood for de novo mutation was graded from 1 (confirmed inherited) to 5 (confirmed de novo) based on family history and mutation status. Fisher's two-tailed exact and unpaired t-tests were used to compare between groups. 187 pathogenic PTEN-mutation positive families were eligible for this study. De novo (grade 5) status was confirmed in 20 (10.7%) probands, and in 36 (19.3%) was suspected based on family history. Demographics, mutations, and phenotypes were similar for probands graded 1 vs. 5 (all P > 0.06). In grade 1 probands, mutations were inherited equally from maternal and paternal lineages (P = 0.55). The frequency of de novo PTEN mutation is at minimum 10.7% and at best 47.6%. Absence of PHTS features within a family history should not preclude consideration of this diagnosis for patients with relevant personal history.",3
"High cumulative risks of cancer in patients with PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome. || Adult Aged Breast Neoplasms Endometrial Neoplasms Female Genetic Association Studies Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Melanoma Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Risk Factors Thyroid Neoplasms || PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome (PHTS) encompasses several clinical syndromes with germline mutations in the PTEN tumour suppressor gene, including Cowden syndrome which is characterised by an increased risk of breast and thyroid cancers. Because PHTS is rare, data regarding cancer risks and genotype-phenotype correlations are limited. The objective of this study was to better define cancer risks in this syndrome with respect to the type and location of PTEN mutations. 154 PHTS individuals with a deleterious germline PTEN mutation were recruited from the activity of the Institut Bergonié genetic laboratory. Detailed phenotypic information was obtained for 146 of them. Age and sex adjusted standardised incidence ratio (SIR) calculations, cumulative cancer risk estimations, and genotype-phenotype analyses were performed. Elevated SIRs were found mainly for female breast cancer (39.1, 95% CI 24.8 to 58.6), thyroid cancer in women (43.2, 95% CI 19.7 to 82.1) and in men (199.5, 95% CI 106.39 to 342.03), melanoma in women (28.3, 95% CI 7.6 to 35.4) and in men (39.4, 95% CI 10.6 to 100.9), and endometrial cancer (48.7, 95% CI 9.8 to 142.3). Cumulative cancer risks at age 70 were 85% (95% CI 70% to 95%) for any cancer, 77% (95% CI 59% to 91%) for female breast cancer, and 38% (95% CI 25% to 56%) for thyroid cancer. The risk of cancer was two times greater in women with PHTS than in men with PHTS (p<0.05). This study shows a considerably high cumulative risk of cancer for patients with PHTS, mainly in women without clear genotype-phenotype correlation for this cancer risk. New recommendations for the management of PHTS patients are proposed.",2 4 3
"Molecular basis of phenylketonuria and related hyperphenylalaninemias: mutations and polymorphisms in the human phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. ||  || Mutations in the human phenylalanine hydroxylase gene producing phenylketonuria or hyperphenylalaninemia have now been identified in many patients from various ethnic groups. These mutations all exhibit a high degree of association with specific restriction fragment-length polymorphism haplotypes at the PAH locus. About 50 of these mutations are single-base substitutions, including six nonsense mutations and eight splicing mutations, with the remainder being missense mutations. One splicing mutation results in a 3 amino acid in-frame insertion. Two or 3 large deletions, 2 single codon deletions, and 2 single base deletions have been found. Twelve of the missense mutations apparently result from the methylation and subsequent deamination of highly mutagenic CpG dinucleotides. Recurrent mutation has been observed at several of these sites, producing associations with different haplotypes in different populations. About half of all missense mutations have been examined by in vitro expression analysis, and a significant correlation has been observed between residual PAH activity and disease phenotype. Since continuing advances in molecular methodologies have dramatically accelerated the rate in which new mutations are being identified and characterized, this register of mutations will be updated periodically.",3
"Germline Mutations in Predisposition Genes in Pediatric Cancer. || Adolescent Autistic Disorder Child Female Genes, Dominant Genes, Neoplasm Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genome, Human Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Neoplasms SEER Program Sequence Analysis, DNA Young Adult || The prevalence and spectrum of predisposing mutations among children and adolescents with cancer are largely unknown. Knowledge of such mutations may improve the understanding of tumorigenesis, direct patient care, and enable genetic counseling of patients and families. In 1120 patients younger than 20 years of age, we sequenced the whole genomes (in 595 patients), whole exomes (in 456), or both (in 69). We analyzed the DNA sequences of 565 genes, including 60 that have been associated with autosomal dominant cancer-predisposition syndromes, for the presence of germline mutations. The pathogenicity of the mutations was determined by a panel of medical experts with the use of cancer-specific and locus-specific genetic databases, the medical literature, computational predictions, and second hits identified in the tumor genome. The same approach was used to analyze data from 966 persons who did not have known cancer in the 1000 Genomes Project, and a similar approach was used to analyze data from an autism study (from 515 persons with autism and 208 persons without autism). Mutations that were deemed to be pathogenic or probably pathogenic were identified in 95 patients with cancer (8.5%), as compared with 1.1% of the persons in the 1000 Genomes Project and 0.6% of the participants in the autism study. The most commonly mutated genes in the affected patients were TP53 (in 50 patients), APC (in 6), BRCA2 (in 6), NF1 (in 4), PMS2 (in 4), RB1 (in 3), and RUNX1 (in 3). A total of 18 additional patients had protein-truncating mutations in tumor-suppressor genes. Of the 58 patients with a predisposing mutation and available information on family history, 23 (40%) had a family history of cancer. Germline mutations in cancer-predisposing genes were identified in 8.5% of the children and adolescents with cancer. Family history did not predict the presence of an underlying predisposition syndrome in most patients. (Funded by the American Lebanese Syrian Associated Charities and the National Cancer Institute.).",3
"Prevalence and functional consequence of TP53 mutations in pediatric adrenocortical carcinoma: a children's oncology group study. || Adolescent Adrenal Cortex Neoplasms Adrenocortical Carcinoma Adult Age Factors Alleles Carcinogenesis Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Family Health Female Genes, p53 Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Male Neoplasm Staging Penetrance Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Young Adult || Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a rare pediatric malignancy. It occurs in excess among individuals with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, which results primarily from germline mutations in the TP53 gene. Prior series exploring frequencies of germline TP53 mutation among children with ACC have been small, geographically limited, or subject to referral bias. The functional consequence of mutations has not been related to phenotype. We provide a genotype-phenotype analysis of TP53 mutations in pediatric ACC and propose a model for tissue-specific effects based on adrenocortical ontogeny. Eighty-eight consecutive, unrelated children with ACC, unselected for family history, underwent germline TP53 sequencing. Rate and distribution of mutations were identified. Functional analysis was performed for novel TP53 variants. Correlation with the International Agency for Research on Cancer p53 database further delineated mutational distribution, association with family history, and risk for multiple primary malignancies (MPMs). Germline mutations were present in 50% of children. These mutations did not correspond to the conventional hotspot mutations. There was a wide range of mutant protein function. Patients bearing alleles encoding protein with higher functionality were less likely to have a strong family cancer history, whereas those with greater loss of function had MPMs and/or positive family history. In patients with MPMs, ACC was the most frequent initial malignancy. Finally, we demonstrated age-dependent rates of TP53 mutation positivity. TP53 mutations are prevalent in children with ACC but decline with age. Mutations result in a broad spectrum of functional loss. Effect of individual mutations may predict carrier and familial disease penetrance with potentially broad implications for clinical surveillance and counseling.",3 4 0
"Prenatal diagnosis of Chinese families with phenylketonuria. ||  || The aim of this study is to investigate the ability to prenatally diagnose phenylketonuria (PKU) by using phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene mutation analysis combined with short tandem repeat (STR) linkage analysis in 118 fetuses from 112 Chinese families. Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood from members of 112 families and the exons and exon-intron boundaries of the PAH gene were amplified by PCR. PCR products were analyzed by bi-directional Sanger sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). The three variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) markers PAH-1, PAH-26, PAH-32 were used in the prenatal diagnosis for the PKU families. We identified a spectrum of 63 different mutations, including 61 point mutations and indels, two large exon deletion mutations, and five novel mutations. A substantial proportion of mutant alleles were accounted for by p.R243Q (15.62%), EX6-96AG (9.82%), p.V399V (7.59%), p.Y356X (6.70%), and p.R413P (5.36%). The same mutations were identified in 31 prenatally genotyped fetuses. We identified 58 fetuses that carried only one mutant allele and 29 fetuses that carried no mutations of PAH and were presumed normal. PAH gene mutation analysis combined with STR linkage analysis can provide rapid and accurate prenatal diagnosis for PKU families.",3 1
"E-cadherin gene variants in gastric cancer families whose probands are diagnosed with diffuse gastric cancer. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Base Sequence Cadherins Female Fluorescent Antibody Technique Genetic Variation Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Pedigree Stomach Neoplasms Transfection || To identify germline E-cadherin mutations responsible for the predisposition to diffuse gastric cancer (DGC) among the Japanese, we screened 17 patients with familial aggregation of gastric cancer by sequencing analysis. All the patients were diagnosed with DGC and had at least 1 sibling with gastric cancer. Two novel E-cadherin gene variants were detected. One was detected in 1 patient only and associated with an amino acid substitution (Val/Met) at codon 832 in the region essential for binding to beta-catenin. The M832 variant was detected not only in the proband but also in 2 other gastric cancer patients in the family. Immunohistochemical analysis of gastric cancer tissue from the proband revealed that E-cadherin expression was markedly reduced and beta-catenin expression was also reduced in cancer cells. However, no significant difference in the activity of beta-catenin binding was detected between the M832 variant and V832 wild-type E-cadherin in immunofluorescence and immunoprecipitation/Western blot analyses. The other was detected in 5 patients and was located in the splice donor site (IVS1+6T/C); however, RT-PCR analysis indicated that the IVS+6C variant did not cause an aberrant splicing. Thus, the M832 variant could be a germline mutation causative of familial aggregation of DGC, although further functional studies are needed to understand the pathogenic significance of this variant.",2 3
"Multicenter Female Fabry Study (MFFS) - clinical survey on current treatment of females with Fabry disease. || Adult Aged Enzyme Replacement Therapy Fabry Disease Female Glycolipids Humans Middle Aged Retrospective Studies Sphingolipids || The aim of the present study was to assess manifestations of and applied treatment concepts for females with Fabry disease (FD) according to the current European Fabry Guidelines. Between 10/2008 and 12/2014, data from the most recent visit of 261 adult female FD patients from six German Fabry centers were retrospectively analyzed. Clinical presentation and laboratory data, including plasma lyso-Gb3 levels were assessed. Fifty-five percent of females were on enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), according to recent European FD guidelines. Thirty-three percent of females were untreated although criteria for ERT initiation were fulfilled. In general, the presence of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) seemed to impact more on ERT initiation than impaired renal function. In ERT-naïve females RAAS blockers were more often prescribed if LVH was present rather than albuminuria. Affected females with missense mutations showed a similar disease burden compared to females with nonsense mutations. Elevated plasma lyso-Gb3 levels in ERT-naïve females seem to be a marker of disease burden, since patients showed comparable incidences of organ manifestations even if they were ~8 years younger than females with normal lyso-Gb3 levels. The treatment of the majority of females with FD in Germany is in line with the current European FD guidelines. However, a relevant number of females remain untreated despite organ involvement, necessitating a careful reevaluation of these females.",3 4
"Mutational spectrum of phenylketonuria in Jiangsu province. || Alleles China DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Male Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Prevalence Retrospective Studies || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is caused by variants in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. We systematically investigated all 13 exons of the PAH gene and their flanking introns in 31 unrelated patients and their parents using next-generation sequencing (NGS). A total of 33 different variants were identified in 58 of 62 mutant PAH alleles. The prevalent variants with a relative frequency of 5 % or more were c.721C > T, c.1068C > A, c.611A > G, c.1197A > T, c.728G > A, c.331C > T, and c.442-1G > A. One novel variant was identified in this study-c.699C > G. We studied genotype-phenotype correlations using the Guldberg arbitrary value (AV) system, which revealed a consistency rate of 38 % (8/21) among the 21 predicted phenotypes. The genotype-based prediction of BH4 responsiveness was also evaluated, and 14 patients (45.2 %) were predicted to be BH4 responsive. This study presents the spectrum of PAH variants in Jiangsu province. The information obtained from the genotype-based prediction of BH4 responsiveness might be used for the rational selection of candidates for BH4 testing. • Phenylketonuria (PKU) is caused by variants in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. • The spectrum of PAH variants in different Chinese populations has been reported. What is new: • This is the first report on the spectrum of PAH variants in Jiangsu province. • This study identified one novel PAH variant-c.699C>G-and and tries to show a genotype-phenotype relationship also regarding BH4-responsiveness.",3 1
"Unresponsiveness to tetrahydrobiopterin of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. || Adolescent Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Genotype Humans Infant Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Statistics, Nonparametric Tyrosine Young Adult || Conflicting results have been reported concerning the efficacy of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), the cofactor of phenylalanine hydroxylase, for reducing phenylalanine (Phe) concentration in phenylketonuria (PKU). We aimed to test quantitatively the effects of BH4 in PKU patients. Seven fully characterized patients were selected among a population of 130 PKU subjects as harboring PKU mutations predicted as BH4 responsive and previously considered responsive to a cofactor challenge. They received a simple Phe (100 mg/kg) and 2 combined Phe (100 mg/kg) and BH4 (20 mg/kg) oral loading tests. Cofactor was administered either before or after the amino acid. The concentrations of Phe, tyrosine (Tyr), and biopterin were measured over 24 hours after loading. The comparative analysis of the loading tests showed that in all patients plasma Phe concentrations peaked within 3 hours, and fell within 24 hours by about 50% in benign, 20% in mild, and 15% in severe phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency regardless of BH4 administration. A consistent or moderate increase of plasma Tyr, again independent of the cofactor challenge, was observed only in the less severe forms of PAH deficiency. Mean blood biopterin concentration increased 6 times after simple Phe and 34 to 39 times after combined loading tests. The administration of BH4 does not alter Phe and Tyr metabolism in PKU patients. The clearance of plasma Phe after oral loading and, as well as Tyr production, is not related to cofactor challenge but to patient's phenotype. The assessment of BH4 responsiveness by the methods so far used is not reliable, and the occurrence of BH4-responsive forms of PKU still has to be definitely proven.",3 1
"High incidence of the cardiac variant of Fabry disease revealed by newborn screening in the Taiwan Chinese population. || Adolescent Adult Aged Asian Continental Ancestry Group Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Fabry Disease Female Humans Incidence Infant, Newborn Male Middle Aged Mutation Neonatal Screening Pedigree Taiwan Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is a treatable lysosomal storage disorder, which is often misdiagnosed or belatedly diagnosed. To determine the disease incidence in the Taiwan Chinese population, a Fabry disease newborn screening study was initiated. A total of 110 027 newborns were screened by assaying the alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A) activity using dry blood spots. Low plasma alpha-Gal A activity and presence of a Fabry mutation was demonstrated in 45 neonates (3 females). Eight different mutations were identified, including 3 known missense mutations (R112H, A143T, and R356W), 4 novel missense mutations (G104V, M296L, G360C, and K391T), and one known intronic mutation (IVS4+919G-->A). The IVS4+919G-->A mutation was most common (82% of patients). A total of 20 maternal grandparents of infants harboring this intronic mutation were evaluated by echocardiography, mutation analysis and alpha-Gal A activity assay. The intronic mutation was found in 9 grandfathers and 11 grandmothers. Of these grandparents, 3 grandfathers (33%) but none of the grandmothers had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Additionally, 16 males who had been diagnosed with idiopathic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were screened by mutation analysis and alpha-Gal A activity; 4 (25%) showed deficient plasma alpha-Gal A activity in combination with the intronic mutation. We found an unexpected high prevalence of the cardiac variant Fabry mutation IVS4+919G-->A among both newborns (approximately 1 in 1600 males) and patients with idiopathic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in the Taiwan Chinese population. The early identification of undiagnosed patients allows timely therapeutic intervention providing a better clinical outcome.",3
"Exome sequencing covers >98% of mutations identified on targeted next generation sequencing panels. || Computer Simulation DNA Mutational Analysis Exome Female Genetic Diseases, Inborn Genetic Testing Genome, Human High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Mutation Sequence Analysis, DNA || With the expanded availability of next generation sequencing (NGS)-based clinical genetic tests, clinicians seeking to test patients with Mendelian diseases must weigh the superior coverage of targeted gene panels with the greater number of genes included in whole exome sequencing (WES) when considering their first-tier testing approach. Here, we use an in silico analysis to predict the analytic sensitivity of WES using pathogenic variants identified on targeted NGS panels as a reference. Corresponding nucleotide positions for 1533 different alterations classified as pathogenic or likely pathogenic identified on targeted NGS multi-gene panel tests in our laboratory were interrogated in data from 100 randomly-selected clinical WES samples to quantify the sequence coverage at each position. Pathogenic variants represented 91 genes implicated in hereditary cancer, X-linked intellectual disability, primary ciliary dyskinesia, Marfan syndrome/aortic aneurysms, cardiomyopathies and arrhythmias. When assessing coverage among 100 individual WES samples for each pathogenic variant (153,300 individual assessments), 99.7% (n = 152,798) would likely have been detected on WES. All pathogenic variants had at least some coverage on exome sequencing, with a total of 97.3% (n = 1491) detectable across all 100 individuals. For the remaining 42 pathogenic variants, the number of WES samples with adequate coverage ranged from 35 to 99. Factors such as location in GC-rich, repetitive, or homologous regions likely explain why some of these alterations were not detected across all samples. To validate study findings, a similar analysis was performed against coverage data from 60,706 exomes available through the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC). Results from this validation confirmed that 98.6% (91,743,296/93,062,298) of pathogenic variants demonstrated adequate depth for detection. Results from this in silico analysis suggest that exome sequencing may achieve a diagnostic yield similar to panel-based testing for Mendelian diseases.",3 4
"Association between Cowden syndrome and Lhermitte-Duclos disease: report of two cases and review of the literature. || Adult Cerebellar Neoplasms Diagnosis, Differential Female Ganglioneuroma Gene Expression Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Pedigree || The authors describe 2 cases of dysplasic gangliocytoma of the cerebellum or Lhermitte-Duclos disease revealing Cowden disease or multiple hamartoma neoplasia syndrome. Cowden disease is a rare autosomal dominant disorder, now considered as a phakomatosis. Nevertheless, relationships between both conditions still remain unclear, since Lhermitte-Duclos disease can also be sporadic. Two patients, 25 and 27 years old, were admitted to the emergency department for an acute intracranial hypertension. In both cases, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed a mass in the cerebellar hemisphere. Pathological examination of surgical resection specimens concluded Lhermitte-Duclos disease. Because of the patients' previous personal and familial medical history, Cowden disease was suspected and confirmed by mutational analysis of the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) gene. In the first case, a nonsense punctual mutation in exon 8 was found. In the second one, a mutation was revealed in the exon 5, a mutational hot spot encoding the phosphatase catalytic core motif. Lhermitte-Duclos disease and Cowden disease can be associated. Germline mutations of PTEN gene are known to be implicated in Cowden disease. This gene, located at chromosome 10q23-3, is a tumor suppressor gene that encodes a protein with phosphatase activity. To date, more than 80 mutations have been reported in Cowden disease. When the diagnosis of either one of these two disorders is established, it is imperative to search for the other one to detect early malignant lesions that occur in Cowden disease. Finally, a long-term follow up of the patient is required and a thorough familial screening is necessary.",3
"Molecular analysis and protein processing in late-onset Pompe disease patients with low levels of acid α-glucosidase activity. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Blotting, Western Child Enzyme Activation Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Middle Aged Mutation Protein Modification, Translational Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II, acid maltase deficiency) is caused by deficiency of lysosomal acid α-glucosidase (GAA). A few late-onset patients have been reported with skin fibroblast GAA activity levels of <2%. We measured GAA activity in skin fibroblasts from 101 patients with late-onset Pompe disease. Whenever possible, we performed Western blot analysis and correlated the results with GAA activity and GAA gene mutations. Thirteen patients (13%) had skin fibroblast GAA activity of <1% of normal. Although there was wide genetic heterogeneity, none of these patients carried the common late-onset mutation c.-32-13T > G. We performed Western blot on 11 patients with <1% GAA activity. All produced GAA protein that was at lower levels and/or was abnormally processed. There is no common mutation associated with <1% GAA activity in late-onset Pompe disease patients. Most patients produce unprocessed forms of GAA protein compared with patients with higher GAA activity.",3 1 4
"Fabry disease: a new approach for the screening of females in high-risk groups. || Fabry Disease Female Genetic Carrier Screening Genotype Humans Leukocytes Mutation Plasma alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is a rare X-linked inborn error of metabolism caused by deficient activity of lysosomal α-galactosidase A (α-GAL). Due to random X inactivation, α-GAL activity in heterozygous females ranges from very low to overlapping normal values. Determining this specific range and altering assays cutoffs could become a valuable tool for minimizing the need in DNA sequencing for screening of all potential carriers. Therefore, the aim of this study was to establish the range of enzyme in dried blood spots (DBS), plasma and leukocytes that suggests carrier status for FD. α-GAL gene was sequenced in 453 women with clinical suspicion and/or positive family history of FD. This data was compared to the α-GAL activity measured in DBS (dried blood spots) and/or plasma and/or leukocytes. About 12% of the samples had pathogenic mutations (c.30_32delG, c.718_719delAA, p.R118C, p.S126G, p.Y152X, p.A156D, p.C202Y, p.N215S, p.P259R, p.D264Y, p.V269M, p.R342Q and p.R356W). When compared to genotype, DBS was the least reliable biochemical test for screening, with very low specificity. Plasma and leukocyte activities presented high AUC in ROC curve analysis, both over 84%. When cutoffs were altered to identify all carriers, leukocyte specificity was higher than that of plasma (35.2% and 27.6%, respectively). Moderated correlation and agreement coefficients were found between them, which reinforces the need for using both data combined. A combined approach involving plasma and leukocyte α-GAL activities, with distinct cutoffs for men and women, could represent a more accurate, faster and less expensive tool to screen women for FD in high-risk groups in middle- and low-income countries.",3
"Fabry disease mimicking hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: genetic screening needed for establishing the diagnosis in women. ||  || Fabry disease, an X-linked storage disorder caused by defective lysosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A activity, may resemble sarcomere-gene-associated hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). The 'cardiac variant' of Fabry disease which only affects the heart may be missed unless specifically tested for. We evaluated 90 consecutively recruited HCM probands and their relatives. Probands without sarcomere-gene mutations were tested for alpha-galactosidase A gene (GLA) mutations. Of the 90 families, 31 (34%) had sarcomere gene mutations and were therefore excluded. In the remaining 59 probands, 3 (5%) had GLA mutations as follows. The first proband, a female with asymmetric septal hypertrophy (ASH), a significant left ventricular outflow tract gradient, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, was heterozygous for a novel missense mutation (p.N139S). The second proband, a male with ASH and multiple episodes of ventricular tachycardia, was hemizygous for a missense mutation (p.A156T). His daughter was heterozygous, but had normal enzyme activity. The third proband was a female with ASH, and no other indices of Fabry disease. She was heterozygous for a GLA missense mutation (p.G271S). She had one affected daughter but her two other children were unaffected. The affected daughter had three children, of whom two were also affected--a boy aged 8 and a daughter aged 10 years. This is the first report of systematic mutation screening of GLA in HCM patients without sarcomere gene mutations. GLA mutations were found in 3/90 (3%) of HCM families and in 2/20 (10%) of females without sarcomere-gene mutations. None of the probands presented other indices of Fabry disease. This, in combination with putative reversibility of cardiac changes by enzyme replacement therapy, supports systematic testing for Fabry disease. Enzyme measurements are sufficient in men, but genetic testing is needed in women.",3
"p53 compound heterozygosity in a severely affected child with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. || Adult Cell Division Child Child, Preschool Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p21 Cyclins DNA, Ribosomal Female Gene Expression Regulation Genes, p53 Genetic Carrier Screening Genetic Variation Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Multigene Family Pedigree Saccharomyces cerevisiae Transcription, Genetic Transfection Tumor Cells, Cultured || The Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a rare, dominantly inherited syndrome that features high risk of cancers in childhood and early adulthood. Affected families tend to develop bone and soft tissue sarcomas, breast cancers, brain tumors, leukemias, and adrenocortical carcinomas. In some kindreds, the genetic abnormality associated with this cancer phenotype is a heterozygous germline mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor gene. Recently, we identified one patient who presented in early childhood with multiple primary cancers and who harbored three germline p53 alterations (R156H and R267Q on the maternal allele and R290H on the paternal allele). To classify the biologic effects of these alterations, functional properties of each of the p53 mutants were examined using in vitro assays of cellular growth suppression and transcriptional activation. Each amino acid substitution conferred partial or complete loss of wild-type p53 function, but the child completed normal embryonic development. This observation has not been previously reported in a human, but is consistent with observations of normal embryogenesis in p53-deficient mice.",2 4 0 3
"Mutation detection in phenylketonuria by using chemical cleavage of mismatch: importance of using probes from both normal and patient samples. || Base Sequence Exons Genetic Testing Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || mRNA from a postmortem liver sample of a patient with classical phenylketonuria was examined using the chemical cleavage of mismatch (CCM) method to search for mutations in phenylalanine hydroxylase. Initial screening identified a heterozygous alteration in exon 2 which changed the encoded amino acid from phenylalanine (TTC) to leucine (TTG) at codon 39 and a polymorphism at codon 430 where the change from CTG to CTC did not alter the encoded leucine. Use of the CCM technique also revealed that the control reference clone differed from the published sequence by having a substitution of isoleucine (ATT) for methionine (ATG) at codon 276 and CAA rather than CAG as the codon for glutamine 232. By using the mRNA from the patient instead of the control as the source for the radiolabeled probe for the CCM technique, a second previously undetected alteration was identified in exon 10 where the change from TCA to CCA at codon 349 altered the amino acid from serine to arginine. Judicious choice of probes gives the CCM method the potential to detect close to 100% of single base mutations.",3
"Molecular apocrine differentiation is a common feature of breast cancer in patients with germline PTEN mutations. || Breast Neoplasms Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases Cluster Analysis Comparative Genomic Hybridization Gene Expression Profiling Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Immunohistochemistry Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases Principal Component Analysis Receptor, ErbB-2 Signal Transduction gamma-Glutamyltransferase || Breast carcinoma is the main malignant tumor occurring in patients with Cowden disease, a cancer-prone syndrome caused by germline mutation of the tumor suppressor gene PTEN characterized by the occurrence throughout life of hyperplastic, hamartomatous and malignant growths affecting various organs. The absence of known histological features for breast cancer arising in a PTEN-mutant background prompted us to explore them for potential new markers. We first performed a microarray study of three tumors from patients with Cowden disease in the context of a transcriptomic study of 74 familial breast cancers. A subsequent histological and immunohistochemical study including 12 additional cases of Cowden disease breast carcinomas was performed to confirm the microarray data. Unsupervised clustering of the 74 familial tumors followed the intrinsic gene classification of breast cancer except for a group of five tumors that included the three Cowden tumors. The gene expression profile of the Cowden tumors shows considerable overlap with that of a breast cancer subgroup known as molecular apocrine breast carcinoma, which is suspected to have increased androgenic signaling and shows frequent ERBB2 amplification in sporadic tumors. The histological and immunohistochemical study showed that several cases had apocrine histological features and expressed GGT1, which is a potential new marker for apocrine breast carcinoma. These data suggest that activation of the ERBB2-PI3K-AKT pathway by loss of PTEN at early stages of tumorigenesis promotes the formation of breast tumors with apocrine features.",3 4
"Mutational spectrum of phenylketonuria in the Chinese Han population: a novel insight into the geographic distribution of the common mutations. ||  || The absence of a comprehensive analysis for phenylketonuria (PKU) mutations in the Chinese Han population has resulted in continued studies during the past 18 y to elucidate the mutational spectrum in patients from virtually all Chinese regions. Our study systematically investigated 13 exons and their surrounding introns of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene in 212 unrelated patients using PCR and direct sequencing. A total of 79 different mutations were identified in 405 of 424 mutant PAH alleles including 15 novel ones. Eight mutations, R243Q, Ex6-96A>G, IVS4 - 1G>A, R413P, Y356X, R111X, R241C, and V399V, with a relative frequency of 3% or more, accounted for two thirds of the identified ones. The data presented in this study indicates that the total pool of mutant PAH alleles in China consisted of a small number of common mutations and a very high number of rare mutations. Moreover, by merging the findings of previous studies to generate a more composite data set for the Chinese mainland, it is shown that there are no significant differences of the common mutations between southern and northern except for R413P statistically, raising questions about the previous hypothesis that great variations on mutation frequencies exist between above regions.",3
"Pendred's syndrome and non-syndromic DFNB4 deafness associated with the homozygous T410M mutation in the SLC26A4 gene in siblings. || Biological Transport Child Chromosomes, Human, Pair 7 DNA Mutational Analysis Deafness Female Genotype Goiter Humans Male Membrane Transport Proteins Middle Aged Pedigree Phenotype Sulfate Transporters Sulfates Syndrome || ",2 1 3
"Tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness in phenylketonuria: prediction with the 48-hour loading test and genotype. || Adolescent Adult Biopterin Child Female Genotype Humans Male Mutation Phenylketonurias Young Adult || How to efficiently diagnose tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) responsiveness in patients with phenylketonuria remains unclear. This study investigated the positive predictive value (PPV) of the 48-hour BH4 loading test and the additional value of genotype. Data of the 48-hour BH4 loading test (20 mg BH4/kg/day) were collected at six Dutch university hospitals. Patients with ≥30% phenylalanine reduction at ≥1 time points during the 48 hours (potential responders) were invited for the BH4 extension phase, designed to establish true-positive BH4 responsiveness. This is defined as long-term ≥30% reduction in mean phenylalanine concentration and/or ≥4 g/day and/or ≥50% increase of natural protein intake. Genotype was collected if available. 177/183 patients successfully completed the 48-hour BH4 loading test. 80/177 were potential responders and 67/80 completed the BH4 extension phase. In 58/67 true-positive BH4 responsiveness was confirmed (PPV 87%). The genotype was available for 120/177 patients. 41/44 patients with ≥1 mutation associated with long-term BH4 responsiveness showed potential BH4 responsiveness in the 48-hour test and 34/41 completed the BH4 extension phase. In 33/34 true-positive BH4 responsiveness was confirmed. 4/40 patients with two known putative null mutations were potential responders; 2/4 performed the BH4 extension phase but showed no true-positive BH4 responsiveness. The 48-hour BH4 loading test in combination with a classified genotype is a good parameter in predicting true-positive BH4 responsiveness. We propose assessing genotype first, particularly in the neonatal period. Patients with two known putative null mutations can be excluded from BH4 testing.",3 1
"Chaperone-like therapy with tetrahydrobiopterin in clinical trials for phenylketonuria: is genotype a predictor of response? ||  || Prospectively enrolled phenylketonuria patients (n=485) participated in an international Phase II clinical trial to identify the prevalence of a therapeutic response to daily doses of sapropterin dihydrochloride (sapropterin, KUVAN(®)). Responsive patients were then enrolled in two subsequent Phase III clinical trials to examine safety, ability to reduce blood Phenylalanine levels, dosage (5-20 mg/kg/day) and response, and bioavailability of sapropterin. We combined phenotypic findings in the Phase II and III clinical trials to classify study-related responsiveness associated with specific alleles and genotypes identified in the patients. We found that 17% of patients showed a response to sapropterin. The patients harbored 245 different genotypes derived from 122 different alleles, among which ten alleles were newly discovered. Only 16.3% of the genotypes clearly conferred a sapropterin-responsive phenotype. Among the different PAH alleles, only 5% conferred a responsive phenotype. The responsive alleles were largely but not solely missense mutations known to or likely to cause misfolding of the PAH subunit. However, the metabolic response was not robustly predictable from the PAH genotypes, based on the study design adopted for these clinical trials, and accordingly it seems prudent to test each person for this phenotype with a standardized protocol.",3 1
"Preliminary Screening Results of Fabry Disease in Kidney Transplantation Patients: A Single-Center Study. || Adult Aged Fabry Disease Female Genetic Testing Humans Kidney Transplantation Male Middle Aged Mutation Prevalence Renal Insufficiency, Chronic alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is a rare X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by the deficiency of alfa-galactosidase A (AGALA) and leads to progressive impairment of renal function in almost all male patients and in a significant proportion of female patients. FD is underdiagnosed or even misdiagnosed in patients undergoing kidney transplantation. We initiated a selective screening study for FD among kidney transplant patients in our center. In this study, 1095 male and female patients were included. Dried blood samples on Guthrie papers were used to analyze galactosidase A enzyme for male patients. Genetic analyses were performed in all female and male patients with low enzyme activity. In total, 648 female and 447 male patients with functioning grafts were evaluated. Among 1095 patients, 5 male patients had AGALA activity below threshold and 3 female patients had galactosidase alpha gene DNA variations. One male patient had a disease-causing mutation. The other 4 patients had polymorphisms causing low enzyme activity. All the 3 female patients had mutations that were associated with FD according to Human Gene Mutation Database (ID: CM025441). In contrast, these mutations were reported as unknown clinical significance in Clinvar (rs149391489). The patients with clinical findings suggesting FD were planned to be analyzed for Lyso Gb3. In our selective screening study, 8 variations were found among 1095 kidney transplantation patients, which needs further investigation to determine causes of FD. Clinical findings, physical examination, and family history are also necessary to evaluate the genetic changes as a mutation in this selected population.",3 4
"Autoimmunity, intestinal lymphoid hyperplasia, and defects in mucosal B-cell homeostasis in patients with PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome. || Adolescent Adult Autoimmune Diseases B-Lymphocytes Castleman Disease Child Child, Preschool Female Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Homeostasis Humans Intestinal Diseases Male Middle Aged Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt Signal Transduction || The Phosphatase And Tensin Homolog Deleted On Chromosome 10 (PTEN) regulates the phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT signaling pathway. In a series of 34 patients with PTEN mutations, we described gastrointestinal lymphoid hyperplasia, extensive hyperplastic tonsils, thymus hyperplasia, autoimmune lymphocytic thyroiditis, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and colitis. Functional analysis of the gastrointestinal mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue revealed increased signaling via the PI3K-AKT pathway, including phosphorylation of S6 and increased cell proliferation, but also reduced apoptosis of CD20(+)CD10(+) B cells. Reduced activity of PTEN therefore affects homeostasis of human germinal center B cells by increasing PI3K-AKT signaling via mammalian target of rapamycin as well as antiapoptotic signals.",3
"Enzyme assay and clinical assessment in subjects with a Chinese hotspot late-onset Fabry mutation (IVS4 + 919G→A). ||  || Newborn screening for Fabry disease in Taiwan Chinese has revealed a high incidence of the late-onset GLA mutation IVS4 + 919G→A (∼1 in 1,500-1,600 males). We studied 94 adults with this mutation [22 men, 72 women; mean age: men 57.8 ± 6.0 (range 42-68), women 39.1 ± 14.1 years (range 19-82)]. Plasma α-galactosidase A activity assay was 10.4 ± 11.2% of normal in the men and 48.6 ± 19.5% of normal in the women. Echocardiography in 90 of the adults revealed left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) in 19 (21%), including 14 of 21 men (67%) and 5 of 69 women (7%). Microalbuminuria, based on the urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio measured on at least two occasions, was present in 17 of 86 subjects (20%) (men: 5/20, 25%; women 12/66, 18%). At least one ocular manifestation consistent with Fabry disease was present in 41 of 52 subjects (79%) who underwent ophthalmologic examination, including 8 (15%) with conjunctival vessel tortuosity, 15 (29%) with cornea verticillata, 10 (19%) with Fabry cataract, and 34 (65%) with retinal vessel tortuosity. Among subjects over 40 years of age, men were more likely than women to have LVH [14/21 (67%) vs 5/25 (20%), p < 0.001]. Cardiovascular, renal and ocular abnormalities are highly prevalent in adult Taiwan Chinese subjects with the Fabry mutation IVS4 + 919G→A. Our findings contribute to the limited understanding of the course of this late-onset disease variant and underscore the need for close follow up in such patients.",3
"Results of clinical genetic testing of 2,912 probands with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: expanded panels offer limited additional sensitivity. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Child, Preschool Costs and Cost Analysis Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genetic Variation High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Middle Aged Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Sensitivity and Specificity Young Adult || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is caused primarily by pathogenic variants in genes encoding sarcomere proteins. We report genetic testing results for HCM in 2,912 unrelated individuals with nonsyndromic presentations from a broad referral population over 10 years. Genetic testing was performed by Sanger sequencing for 10 genes from 2004 to 2007, by HCM CardioChip for 11 genes from 2007 to 2011 and by next-generation sequencing for 18, 46, or 51 genes from 2011 onward. The detection rate is ~32% among unselected probands, with inconclusive results in an additional 15%. Detection rates were not significantly different between adult and pediatric probands but were higher in females compared with males. An expanded gene panel encompassing more than 50 genes identified only a very small number of additional pathogenic variants beyond those identifiable in our original panels, which examined 11 genes. Familial genetic testing in at-risk family members eliminated the need for longitudinal cardiac evaluations in 691 individuals. Based on the projected costs derived from Medicare fee schedules for the recommended clinical evaluations of HCM family members by the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association, our data indicate that genetic testing resulted in a minimum cost savings of about $0.7 million. Clinical HCM genetic testing provides a definitive molecular diagnosis for many patients and provides cost savings to families. Expanded gene panels have not substantively increased the clinical sensitivity of HCM testing, suggesting major additional causes of HCM still remain to be identified.",3
"Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome among children diagnosed with pediatric cancer in Southern Brazil. || Adolescent Adrenal Cortex Neoplasms Adrenocortical Carcinoma Brazil Carcinoma Child Child, Preschool Choroid Plexus Neoplasms Female Gene Rearrangement Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Middle Aged Neoplasms Prevalence Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Pediatric cancers are a feature in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome and its variant Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFS/LFL). To the best of the authors' knowledge, TP53 germline mutations are currently the only molecular defect known to be associated with this disease. Recently, a specific germline mutation in this gene, p.R337H, has been reported at a high prevalence in Brazil. The prevalence of LFS/LFL was investigated in children with cancer who were diagnosed with tumors on the LFS/LFL spectrum and in a small consecutive series of controls without cancer. The prevalence of the germline p.R337H mutation and of other germline TP53 mutations was investigated in a general group of children with cancer and exclusively in children fulfilling the clinical criteria for LFS/LFL, respectively. Among the 65 children without cancer, 1.5% had a family history of LFL whereas of the 292 children with cancer, 25.3% had a family history of LFL (P < .001). Screening for the p.R337H mutation identified 11 carriers (3.7%), 9 of whom were diagnosed with adrenocortical carcinomas (ACC) and 2 of whom were diagnosed with choroid plexus carcinomas. One of the ACC probands was homozygous mutant. The Brazilian founder haplotype and loss of heterozygosity at the p.R337H locus were present in all carriers. In addition, direct sequencing of the entire TP53 coding region and gene rearrangement analysis of probands fulfilling the criteria for LFL (Eeles 2 criteria, Birch and/or Chompret criteria) and who were negative for the p.R337H mutation revealed a DNA-binding domain pathogenic mutation, p.G245S, in 1 child. TP53 p.R337H testing should be offered to Brazilian children diagnosed with ACC and choroid plexus carcinoma. A significant percentage of children with cancer in southern Brazil fulfill the criteria for LFL and should be referred for genetic risk assessment.",2 4 3
"Three germline mutations in the TP53 gene. ||  || Three germline mutations in the TP53 tumor-suppressor gene are reported, two of which are not reported previously. A missense mutation at codon 265 of TP53 was found in three patients of a family that complied with the definition of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. A nonsense mutation in codon 306 was found in a woman who had had a rhabdomyosarcoma at age 4 and a subsequent breast cancer at age 22. She was part of a Li-Fraumeni-like family, but the parental origin of the mutation could not be traced. Finally, while screening for somatic alterations in TP53 in a series of 141 sporadic breast tumors, we detected a constitutional missense mutation in codon 235 in a woman diagnosed with breast cancer at age 26 and a recurrence 4 years later. The recurrence, but not the primary tumor, showed an additional missense mutation at codon 245 as well as loss of the wild-type allele. This suggests that the 245 mutation was particularly important for tumor progression and that there might exist heterogeneity in terms of cancer predisposition potential among the various germline TP53 mutations.",3
"New evidence for assessing tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) responsiveness. || Adolescent Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Female Follow-Up Studies Genotype Humans Infant Male Phenylalanine Phenylketonurias Pilot Projects Reproducibility of Results Spain Treatment Outcome Young Adult || To evaluate the protocol we propose for detecting BH(4)-responsive patients and the possibility of delimiting more precisely the population to be tested. We recruited 102 phenylketonuric patients on a phenylalanine (Phe)-restricted diet. The initial stage of the protocol was a 24-h BH(4) loading test involving Phe loading and subsequent ingestion of the cofactor, a 50% fall in blood Phe levels being considered a positive response. The non-responders at this stage then completed a one-week therapeutic test combining BH(4) administration and daily protein intake meeting recommended dietary allowances, to assess whether the 24-h test had detected all responders. The 24-h test detected almost all BH(4) responders (30.3% of the 99 patients included in the analysis), with just two patients (2.0%) subsequently responding positively to the therapeutic test. The 24-h test did not give any false positive results. The 24-h BH(4) loading test is clinically useful for screening phenylketonuric patients. Specifically, 95% of patients with Phe levels <700 μmol/L, and none with Phe levels >1500 μmol/L were BH(4)-responsive. Given these results, we conclude that patients with Phe levels<700 μmol/L or>1500 μmol/L probably do not need to be tested, prioritising the identification of BH(4)-responsiveness among individuals with intermediate Phe concentrations, between the aforementioned values. Additionally, our results suggest that the therapeutic test only needs to be performed in cases where the reduction in blood Phe levels after cofactor administration is within the range 40%-50%.",3 1
"Lhermitte-Duclos disease and giant meningioma as manifestations of Cowden's disease. ||  || A 43-year-old man with synchronous occurrence of Lhermitte-Duclos disease (dysplastic gangliocytoma of the cerebellum) and a giant meningioma with subcutaneous infiltration is reported. Subsequent examinations revealed typical manifestations of Cowden's disease (multiple hamartomaneoplasia syndrome), i.e. mucocutaneous lesions and increased head circumference. Our findings support the view that there is a correlation between Lhermitte-Duclos disease and Cowden's disease. We conclude that all patients with Lhermitte-Duclos disease should be thoroughly examined with regard to Cowden's disease, which necessitates lifelong follow-up with screening for neoplasia in various organ systems. The occurrence of both Lhermitte-Duclos disease and a meningioma as part of the Cowden's symptom complex is very rare and to our knowledge only one case with this combination of lesions has previously been reported.",3
"Comprehensive screening of the USH2A gene in Usher syndrome type II and non-syndromic recessive retinitis pigmentosa. || Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Genetic Testing Hearing Loss Humans Male Mutation Pedigree Retinitis Pigmentosa Syndrome || A screen of the entire coding region of the USH2A gene in 129 unrelated patients with Usher syndrome type II (USH2) and in 146 unrelated patients with non-syndromic autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (ARRP) uncovered 54 different sequence variations, including 18 likely pathogenic mutations (13 frameshift, three nonsense, and two missense), 12 changes of uncertain pathogenicity (11 missense changes and one in-frame deletion), and 24 non-pathogenic rare variants or polymorphisms. Of the 18 likely pathogenic mutations, nine were novel. Among the USH2 patients, 50 (39%) had one or two likely pathogenic mutations. The most common mutant allele in USH2 patients was E767fs, which was found in 29 patients, including one homozygote. Among the ARRP patients, we found 17 (12%) with one or two likely pathogenic mutations. The most common mutant allele in ARRP patients was C759F and it was found in 10 patients. The C759F allele was also found in two USH2 patients; in neither of them was a change in the other allele found. The second most common mutant allele in both patient groups was L1447fs (found in 6/50 USH2 patients and 6/17 ARRP patients). Of the 50+17=67 patients with identified USH2A mutations, only one mutation in one allele was found in 41+12=53 (79%); the reason for the high proportion of patients with only one identified mutation is obscure. Our results indicate that USH2A mutations are found in about 7% of all cases of RP in North America, a frequency similar to the RPGR gene (8%) and the rhodopsin gene (10%).",3 1 4
"Increased prevalence of eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorders in pediatric PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes. || Adolescent Biopsy Child Child, Preschool Colon Enteritis Eosinophilia Eosinophils Esophagus Female Gastritis Gastrointestinal Tract Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Infant Intestinal Polyps Male Ohio PTEN Phosphohydrolase Stomach || The PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes (PHTSs) are a collection of disorders caused by germline mutations of the tumor suppressor gene PTEN. Eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorders (EGIDs) are rare diseases characterized by food-induced, eosinophil-dominant inflammation in various segments of the gastrointestinal tract. On the basis of our clinical observations of several patients with EGID-PHTS, we investigated whether there is an association between these 2 disorders. The Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside (i2b2) warehouse was queried for the years 2007 to 2012 using International Classification of Diseases-9 codes for PTEN-related diseases; the results were cross-referenced with participants enrolled in the Cincinnati Center for Eosinophilic Disorder's EGID database to identify patients with both disorders. In an effort to replicate our findings, the Cleveland Clinic Genomic Medicine Institute PTEN database was queried for cases between 2005 and 2012. Inclusion criteria were age ≤ 18 years, history of PHTS, and an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and/or colonoscopy with at least 1 histologic EGID diagnosis confirmed by a CCHMC pathologist. The Pearson χ(2) test was used to determine the odds of EGID enrichment in PHTS. Of the 1,058,260 CCHMC distinct patients identified by the i2b2 search, 53 had clinical diagnoses suggestive of PHTS. Thirteen of the 53 had PTEN mutations, with 8 of 13 (62%) having had an EGD and/or colonoscopy. Five of the 8 had confirmed EGID. At the Cleveland Clinic, 3 of 75 patients (3/4 who had EGD and/or colonoscopy) with PHTS had confirmed EGID. CCHMC i2b2 query data showed a substantial enrichment of EGIDs in PHTSs (odds ratio 272; confidence interval 89-831, P < 0.0001). An EGID prevalence estimate from the i2b2 query supported a marked enrichment of EGIDs in PHTSs in the Cleveland Clinic database (P < 0.0001). Among the 8 subjects with EGIDs and PHTSs, the age at EGID and PHTS diagnosis was 7.6 ± 3.2 and 7.9 ± 5.8 years, respectively. Patients with EGID-PHTS had excess eosinophils in biopsies of the esophagus (75%), stomach (38%), and colon (13%), with a notable presence of eosinophil-rich gastrointestinal polyposis (88%). EGID is a previously unrecognized comorbid disease in pediatric patients with PHTS. These data suggest a potential role of PTEN in contributing to EGID susceptibility.",3
"A silent mutation induces exon skipping in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in phenylketonuria. || Base Sequence Exons Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias RNA, Messenger Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Transfection Tumor Cells, Cultured || An A-->T substitution in cDNA nucleotide 1197 (c.1197A/T) of the human phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene has been regarded as a silent mutation, because both the wild-type (GUA) and the mutant (GUU) alleles encode a valine residue at codon 399 (V399 V). The nucleotide c.1197 is located at the 3'-end of exon 11at position -3 of the exon-intron junction. To explore whether the substitution exerts any effects on the processing of the PAH mRNA, illegitimate PAH transcripts from lymphoblast cultures of a phenylketonuria (PKU) patient heterozygous for c.1197A/T were analyzed by the polymerase chain reaction following reverse-transcription (RT-PCR). mRNAs with an exon 11 deletion were revealed. Furthermore, by using an R408 W mutation in the paternal allele as a marker, sequence analysis of the RT-PCR products indicates that virtually all PAH transcripts from the maternal allele with the c. 1197A/T substitution do not contain exon 11. To address whether this substitution is the main determinant for exon skipping, PAH minigenes with or without the substitution were constructed and transfected to a human hepatoma cell line. Analysis of the transcription products by S1 nuclease mapping clearly indicated that such exon 11 skipping was directly associated with the c.1197A/T substitution. Thus, this study demonstrates that the c.1197A/T substitution in the PAH gene is not just a neutral polymorphism but a mutation that induces post-transcriptional skipping of exon 11 leading to a PKU phenotype.",3 1 0
"TP53 germline mutation testing in 180 families suspected of Li-Fraumeni syndrome: mutation detection rate and relative frequency of cancers in different familial phenotypes. || Adult Colonic Neoplasms DNA Mutational Analysis Family Health Female Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Middle Aged Neoplasms Netherlands Pancreatic Neoplasms Phenotype Risk Factors Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Young Adult || BACKGROUND Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome. Most families fulfilling the classical diagnostic criteria harbour TP53 germline mutations. However, TP53 germline mutations may also occur in less obvious phenotypes. As a result, different criteria are in use to decide which patients qualify for TP53 mutation analysis, including the LFS, Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) and Chompret criteria. We investigated which criteria for TP53 mutation analysis resulted in the highest mutation detection rate and sensitivity in Dutch families. We describe the tumour spectrum in TP53-positive families and calculated tumour type specific relative risks. METHOD A total of 180 Dutch families referred for TP53 mutation analysis were evaluated. Tumour phenotypes were verified by pathology reports or clinical records. RESULTS A TP53 germline mutation was identified in 24 families. When the Chompret criteria were used 22/24 mutations were detected (sensitivity 92%, mutation detection rate 21%). In LFS and LFL families 18/24 mutations were found (sensitivity 75%). The two mutations detected outside the 'Chompret group' were found in a child with rhabdomyosarcoma and a young woman with breast cancer. In the mutation carriers, in addition to the classical LFS tumour types, colon and pancreatic cancer were also found significantly more often than in the general population. CONCLUSION We suggest TP53 mutation testing for all families fulfilling the Chompret criteria. In addition, TP53 mutation testing can be considered in the event of childhood sarcoma and breast cancer before 30 years. In addition to the risk for established LFS tumour types, TP53-positive individuals may also have an elevated risk for pancreatic and colon cancer.",3 4
"Mutations in the GLA Gene and LysoGb3: Is It Really Anderson-Fabry Disease? || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Alleles Amino Acid Substitution Biomarkers Child Child, Preschool Fabry Disease Female Genotype Glycolipids Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Sphingolipids Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Anderson-Fabry disease (FD) is a rare, progressive, multisystem storage disorder caused by the partial or total deficit of the lysosomal enzyme α-galactosidase A (α-Gal A). It is an X-linked, lysosomal enzymopathy due to mutations in the galactosidase alpha gene (GLA), encoding the α-Gal A. To date, more than 900 mutations in this gene have been described. In our laboratories, the study of genetic and enzymatic alterations related to FD was performed in about 17,000 subjects with a symptomatology referable to this disorder. The accumulation of globotriaosylsphingosine (LysoGb3) was determined in blood of positives. Exonic mutations in the GLA gene were detected in 471 patients (207 Probands and 264 relatives): 71.6% of mutations were associated with the classic phenotype, 19.8% were associated with the late-onset phenotype, and 8.6% of genetic variants were of unknown significance (GVUS). The accumulation of LysoGb3 was found in all male patients with a mutation responsible for classic or late-onset FD. LysoGb3 levels were consistent with the type of mutations and the symptomatology of patients. α-Gal A activity in these patients is absent or dramatically reduced. In recent years, confusion about the pathogenicity of some mutations led to an association between non-causative mutations and FD. Our study shows that the identification of FD patients is possible by associating clinical history, GLA gene analysis, α-Gal A assay, and blood accumulation of LysoGB3. In our experience, LysoGB3 can be considered a reliable marker, which is very useful to confirm the diagnosis of Fabry disease.",3 4
"Immune Modulation Therapy in a CRIM-Positive and IgG Antibody-Positive Infant with Pompe Disease Treated with Alglucosidase Alfa: A Case Report. ||  || Pompe disease is characterized by deficiency or absence of activity of the lysosomal enzyme acid alpha-glucosidase. As a result of ineffective metabolism, glycogen progressively accumulates in muscle tissues. Patients with an aggressive classic infantile-onset form generally rapidly die of cardiorespiratory failure. A cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM)-negative status is predictive of high anti-alglucosidase alfa antibody titers and usually a poor clinical outcome of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). CRIM-positive patients can also develop robust antibody titers complicating therapeutic management.We successfully used an immune modulation therapy (IMT) protocol in a CRIM-positive infantile-onset patient with Pompe disease in whom infusions had to be temporarily discontinued because of safety concerns despite administration of pre-infusion medication. Prior to discontinuation, she had shown signs of clinical deterioration and continuous ventilation support through a tracheostomy was required. She was found to be positive for anti-alglucosidase alfa antibodies (1:6,400). IMT (rituximab, methotrexate and intravenous gamma globulin) was started, ERT was safely reintroduced during the IMT induction phase and, subsequently, the enzyme dose was increased, all without any complications. Antibodies disappeared, IMT was tapered and discontinued, and cadiomyopathy steadily improved. During 1 year of follow-up, she remained ventilator dependent and no gains in motor skills were noticed; motor functions will be closely monitored during sustained ERT.Although the reversal of clinical decline in our CRIM-positive and antibody-positive infant with Pompe disease cannot be solely attributed to IMT, our experiences with this protocol may be helpful to other physicians encountering comparable therapeutic dilemmas.",3 1
"Expanding the clinical spectrum of late-onset Pompe disease: dilated arteriopathy involving the thoracic aorta, a novel vascular phenotype uncovered. || Adult Aorta, Thoracic Aortic Diseases Child, Preschool Dilatation, Pathologic Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Middle Aged Phenotype || Cerebro-vascular arteriopathy has been reported in late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD). Evidence of increased aortic stiffness in some patients and smooth muscle involvement in LOPD raises the possibility of aortic involvement. Our aim was to determine if aortic arteriopathy may be a complication of LOPD. One patient with LOPD was diagnosed with aortic dilatation at Duke Metabolic clinic, 4 others were diagnosed at University of Mainz, Germany, where chest X-ray and echocardiography are routinely done for patients. Other causes of aortic vascular disease were assessed. We report evidence of dilated arteriopathy involving primarily the ascending thoracic aorta in 5 females with late-onset Pompe disease. One patient had a bicuspid aortic valve and developed dissection. Another patient with juvenile onset disease had both thoracic and basilar artery aneurysms. Aneurysmal dilatation of the thoracic aorta is an underreported vascular complication of LOPD, probably due to the same pathological process that occurs in the brain. Chest X-ray together with echocardiography should be incorporated as initial screening tools for aortic aneurysms in patients with LOPD. When ectasia is suspected, or the ascending aorta is not visualized, contrast- mediated thoracic CT or MRA may be necessary. Large-scale studies are warranted to determine the prevalence and extent of aortic vascular involvement.",3 1 4
"Enhancing the diagnosis of fabry disease in cardiology with a targeted information: a before-after control-impact study. ||  || Cardiac complications in Fabry disease are frequent and dominated by a high frequency of left ventricular hypertrophy; therefore, cardiologists may have an essential role in screening for this disease. Providing cardiologists with targeted information on Fabry disease would be valuable and could reduce both diagnostic and therapeutic delays. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficiency of such strategy for Fabry screening. We conducted a before-after control-impact study by comparing observations made before and after targeted information on Fabry disease among cardiologists. The information on Fabry disease consisted of (1) an educational booklet, (2) oral information and (3) screening kits. The programme was evaluated at the end of a 12-month study period. Forty-two cardiologists participated to this study. None of them had conducted screening test and new diagnostic for Fabry disease in the 3 years prior the information. After the information, screening with dried blood spots was performed in 55 patients (ranged 18-77 years, men: 39) with cardiac monitoring for supposed sarcomeric hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (n=41) or unexplained left ventricular hypertrophy (n=14) from January 2015 to January 2016. Two new cases of Fabry disease were diagnosed (3.4%) in two men (ages 58 and 51 years). The information was deemed relevant in both content and structure and was deemed useful for everyday practice. Cardiologists valued the targeted information on Fabry disease. This information had a direct clinical impact by allowing the diagnosis of two new families with Fabry disease.",3
"Clinical and molecular aspects of 30 patients with late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD): unusual features and response to treatment. || Adult Analysis of Variance Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal Mutation Respiration Disorders Severity of Illness Index Ureohydrolases Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is a rare metabolic disorder, due to mutations in the gene encoding acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA), of which infantile and late-onset forms may occur. Aim of the work was to analyze clinical and laboratory data of a cohort of late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) patients, collected during the last 15 years and to point out unusual phenotypic/genotypic features as well as enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) responses. We diagnosed 30 LOPD patients; at follow-up, they underwent motor, respiratory, cardiac and muscle MRI evaluations. Motor performances were tested by Walton Gardner-Medwin, GSGC and 6MWT tests. Respiratory function was assessed as FVC% in upright/supine position. LOPD presentations were represented by presymptomatic hyperCKemia (37%), proximal/axial muscle weakness (53%) and respiratory impairment (10%). Median diagnostic delay was 8.6 years (± 8.8). Atypical features were observed in 4 patients: marked distal muscle weakness and severe hearing loss at onset, as well as leukoencephalopathy and mesial temporal sclerosis during the disease course. By GAA sequence analysis, two causing mutations were detected in 22/30 patients, only one in the remaining 8 subjects. Overall, 29/30 patients harbored the common c.-32-13T>G mutation (2 were homozygous). Two new DNA variations were discovered (c.2395C>G, c.1771C>T). 14 patients received ERT for up to 60 months. Our study confirms LOPD clinical and genetic heterogeneity: atypical features may contribute to expand the clinical phenotype highlighting its multi-systemic nature. A timely diagnosis could allow early ERT start. An accurate follow-up is recommended to evaluate treatment responses.",3 4
"Cleft lip/palate and CDH1/E-cadherin mutations in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. || Adult Cadherins Cleft Lip Cleft Palate DNA Mutational Analysis Gene Expression Profiling Humans Mutation Pedigree Stomach Neoplasms || We report the association of CDH1/E-cadherin mutations with cleft lip, with or without cleft palate (CLP), in two families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). In each family, the CDH1 mutation was a splicing mutation generating aberrant transcripts with an in-frame deletion, removing the extracellular cadherin repeat domains involved in cell-cell adhesion. Such transcripts might encode mutant proteins with trans-dominant negative effects. We found that CDH1 is highly expressed at 4 and 5 weeks in the frontonasal prominence, and at 6 weeks in the lateral and medial nasal prominences of human embryos, and is therefore expressed during the critical stages of lip and palate development. These findings suggest that alteration of the E-cadherin pathway can contribute to human clefting.",3 4 0
Germline mutation of the tumour suppressor PTEN in Proteus syndrome. || DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Male PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Proteus Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Proteins || ,3 4
"High incidence of later-onset fabry disease revealed by newborn screening. || Adult Age of Onset Fabry Disease Female Humans Incidence Infant, Newborn Male Mutation, Missense Neonatal Screening Pedigree Phenotype RNA Splicing || The classic phenotype of Fabry disease, X-linked alpha -galactosidase A (alpha -Gal A) deficiency, has an estimated incidence of approximately 1 in 50,000 males. The recent recognition of later-onset variants suggested that this treatable lysosomal disease is more frequent. To determine the disease incidence, we undertook newborn screening by assaying the alpha-Gal A activity in blood spots from 37,104 consecutive Italian male neonates. Enzyme-deficient infants were retested, and ""doubly screened-positive"" infants and their relatives were diagnostically confirmed by enzyme and mutation analyses. Twelve (0.03%) neonates had deficient alpha-Gal A activities and specific mutations, including four novel missense mutations (M51I, E66G, A73V, and R118C), three missense mutations (F113L, A143T, and N215S) identified previously in later-onset patients, and one splicing defect (IVS5(+1G-->T)) reported in a patient with the classic phenotype. Molecular modeling and in vitro overexpression of the missense mutations demonstrated structures and residual activities, which were rescued/enhanced by an alpha-Gal A-specific pharmacologic chaperone, consistent with mutations that cause the later-onset phenotype. Family studies revealed undiagnosed Fabry disease in affected individuals. In this population, the incidence of alpha-Gal A deficiency was 1 in approximately 3,100, with an 11 : 1 ratio of patients with the later-onset : classic phenotypes. If only known disease-causing mutations were included, the incidence would be 1 in approximately 4,600, with a 7 : 1 ratio of patients with the later-onset : classic phenotypes. These results suggest that the later-onset phenotype of Fabry disease is underdiagnosed among males with cardiac, cerebrovascular, and/or renal disease. Recognition of these patients would permit family screening and earlier therapeutic intervention. However, the higher incidence of the later-onset phenotype in patients raises ethical issues related to when screening should be performed--in the neonatal period or at early maturity, perhaps in conjunction with screening for other treatable adult-onset disorders.",2 0 3
"Two novel PAH gene mutations detected in Italian phenylketonuric patients. || Child Female Humans Italy Male Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic || We report the identification by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and sequence analysis of two new phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene mutations (IVS4nt-2 and N207S) in single chromosomes of two unrelated Italian phenylketonuric (PKU) patients. Interestingly, mutation Y204C, found on the second mutant allele of family F1, has been previously detected in Chinese patients. Haplotype analysis showed that the latter mutation is linked to the same haplotype (H4) in both Chinese and Italian patients, suggesting a common origin. In vivo assessment of mutation severity indicates that N207S is associated with classic PKU. The identification of these two new mutations further extends the remarkable heterogeneity of the PAH locus in the Italian population.",3 1
"Identification of fifteen novel mutations and genotype-phenotype relationship in Fabry disease. || Codon, Nonsense Cohort Studies DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Fabry Disease Family Health Female Genotype Humans Male Mutation Mutation, Missense Phenotype Sequence Deletion alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is an X-linked recessive disorder caused by a deficiency in the lysosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A, which results in a progressive multisystem disease. Most families have private mutations and no general correlation between genotype and disease manifestations has been described to date. Forty-nine patients (47 males and 2 females) from 36 affected families were selected for the study. Their evaluation included clinical examination, identification of alpha-galactosidase A gene mutations and residual enzymatic activity. For mutation detection, each exon with flanking intronic sequences was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from the patient's genomic DNA and sequenced. Analysis of the resulting sequences was conducted to identify structural defects in the gene. Each of the Fabry patients carried a mutation in the alpha-galactosidase A gene. Fifteen mutations were novel. They included missense mutations (M51K, Y123M, G261D), nonsense point mutations (E251X) and small insertions or deletions creating a premature translational termination signal (P6X, D93X, W162X, K240X, H302X, I303X, L403X, S345X, G375X, F396X). Residual alpha-galactosidase A activity was significantly lower in patients with neuropathic pain (p=0.01) and in patients with mutations leading to a nonconservative amino acid change (p=0.04). Our findings emphasize the wide variety of genetic mechanisms leading to Fabry disease. A significant genotype-phenotype relationship was found.",3
"The mutation spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene and associated haplotypes reveal ethnic heterogeneity in the Taiwanese population. || Ethnic Groups Gene Frequency Genetic Association Studies Genetic Heterogeneity Haplotypes Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Taiwan || Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency is responsible for most cases of phenylketonuria (PKU). In this study of the PAH mutation spectrum in the Taiwanese population, 139 alleles were identified including 34 different mutations. The V190G, Q267R and F392I mutations are first reported in this study. The most common mutations, R241C, R408Q and Ex6-96A>G, account for 23.2%, 12.0% and 9.2%, of the mutant alleles, respectively. Haplotype analysis shows that R241C and Ex6-96A>G are exclusively associated with haplotype 4.3 to suggest founder effects. On the other hand, R408Q is found on two distinct haplotypes suggesting recurrent mutations. The spectrum of PAH mutations in Taiwan shows various links to those of other Asian regions, yet remarkable differences exist. Notably, R408Q, E286K and -4173_-407del, accounting for 21% of all mutant alleles in Taiwan, are very rare or are undetected among PKU cohorts of other Asian regions to suggest local founder effects. Moreover, the low homozygosity value of 0.092 hints at a high degree of ethnic heterogeneity within the Taiwanese population. Our study of PAH mutation spectrum and the associated haplotypes is useful for subsequent study on the origin and migration pattern via Taiwan, an island at the historical crossroad of migration of ancient populations.",3 1 0
"Predicted effects of missense mutations on native-state stability account for phenotypic outcome in phenylketonuria, a paradigm of misfolding diseases. || Animals Biopterin Enzyme Stability Humans Mutant Proteins Mutation, Missense Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Protein Folding Protein Structure, Quaternary Protein Structure, Secondary Protein Subunits Rats Reproducibility of Results Software Thermodynamics || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a genetic disease caused by mutations in human phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). Most missense mutations result in misfolding of PAH, increased protein turnover, and a loss of enzymatic function. We studied the prediction of the energetic impact on PAH native-state stability of 318 PKU-associated missense mutations, using the protein-design algorithm FoldX. For the 80 mutations for which expression analyses have been performed in eukaryote systems, in most cases we found substantial overall correlations between the mutational energetic impact and both in vitro residual activities and patient metabolic phenotype. This finding confirmed that the decrease in protein stability is the main molecular pathogenic mechanism in PKU and the determinant for phenotypic outcome. Metabolic phenotypes have been shown to be better predicted than in vitro residual activities, probably because of greater stringency in the phenotyping process. Finally, all the remaining 238 PKU missense mutations compiled at the PAH locus knowledgebase (PAHdb) were analyzed, and their phenotypic outcomes were predicted on the basis of the energetic impact provided by FoldX. Residues in exons 7-9 and in interdomain regions within the subunit appear to play an important structural role and constitute hotspots for destabilization. FoldX analysis will be useful for predicting the phenotype associated with rare or new mutations detected in patients with PKU. However, additional factors must be considered that may contribute to the patient phenotype, such as possible effects on catalysis and interindividual differences in physiological and metabolic processes.",3 0
"Characterization of cryptic splicing in germline PTEN intronic variants in Cowden syndrome. || Adolescent Adult Aged Alternative Splicing Child Child, Preschool Female Gene Expression Regulation Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans MAP Kinase Signaling System Male Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pathology, Molecular Protein Isoforms Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt RNA Splice Sites Young Adult || Germline mutations in the tumor-suppressor gene PTEN predispose to subsets of Cowden syndrome (CS), Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, and autism. Evidence-based classification of PTEN variants as either deleterious or benign is urgently needed for accurate molecular diagnosis and gene-informed genetic counseling. We studied 34 different germline PTEN intronic variants from 61 CS patients, characterized their PTEN mRNA processing, and analyzed PTEN expression and downstream readouts of P-AKT and P-ERK1/2. While we found that many mutations near splice junctions result in exon skipping, we also identified the presence of cryptic splicing that resulted in premature termination or a shift in isoform usage. PTEN protein expression is significantly lower in the group with splicing changes while P-AKT, but not P-ERK1/2, is significantly increased. Our observations of these PTEN intronic variants should contribute to the determination of pathogenicity of PTEN intronic variants and aid in genetic counseling.",2 4 0 3
"DGGE analysis as supplement to SSCP analysis of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene: detection of eight (one de novo, seven inherited) of nine remaining Norwegian PKU mutations. ||  || ",3
"Mutations of PTEN in patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba phenotype. || Adolescent Adult Child Exons Female Genes, Tumor Suppressor Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phenotype Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Pigmentation Disorders Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Proteins || We report three new mutations in PTEN, the gene responsible for Cowden disease in five patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome from three unrelated families. This finding confirms that Cowden disease, a dominant cancer predisposing syndrome, and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, which includes macrocephaly, multiple lipomas, intestinal hamartomatous polyps, vascular malformations, and pigmented macules of the penis, are allelic disorders at the PTEN locus on chromosome 10q.",2 4 3
"Prevalence and diversity of constitutional mutations in the p53 gene among 21 Li-Fraumeni families. || Base Sequence Child Codon Exons Family Health Female Genes, p53 Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Prevalence || The entire coding sequence of the p53 gene was analysed for the presence of mutations in 12 families conforming to a restricted definition of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (classic LFS) and nine families with features of LFS conforming to a broader definition. Mutations were detected in seven families. Six were point mutations with one each affecting codons 175, 180, and 220 and three affecting codon 248. The seventh was a deletion/insertion mutation in exon 4. Germline mutations in p53 were a feature of families which included children with rhabdomyosarcoma and/or adrenal cortical carcinoma. Germline p53 mutations were detected in six of the nine families with such tumors. An analysis of these 7 mutations, together with 34 published examples, showed that more than one-half were transitions at CpG dinucleotides, suggesting that the majority of germline p53 mutations may arise as a result of spontaneous events. The most common cancers occurring in the 41 families with germline p53 mutations, in common with classic LFS, were bone and soft tissue sarcoma, breast cancer, brain tumors, leukemia, and adrenocortical carcinoma, although less than one-half of the probands with germline p53 mutations came from classic LFS families. More than one-half of the cancers overall and nearly one-third of the breast cancers were diagnosed before 30 years of age. These observations have important implications for asymptomatic carriers of germline p53 mutations, and there is a need for international collaboration in the development of protocols for the management of such families.",2 4 3
"Phenylketonuria in Costa Rica: preliminary spectrum of PAH mutations and their associations with highly polymorphic haplotypes. ||  || A preliminary evaluation of the molecular basis of phenylketonuria (PKU) in Costa Rica was made by performing mutational analyses in the six PKU families identified to date. These studies revealed the presence of the previously reported European mutations IVS1nt5, L48S, E221G and IVS12ntl as well as the novel mutation IVS7nt3. The combined use of the STR, VNTR and XmnI polymorphic systems for the PAH gene resulted in a discriminant distribution of haplotypes among normal and mutant chromosomes and suggests its potential usefulness for future diagnostic applications in Costa Rican PKU kindreds. This is the first report of a genetic analysis in a Central American PKU population.",3
"Mutational and phenotypical spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Denmark. || Alleles Denmark Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Humans Male Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || We describe the genotypes of the complete cohort, from 1967 to 2014, of phenylketonuria (PKU) patients in Denmark, in total 376 patients. A total of 752 independent alleles were investigated. Mutations were identified on 744 PKU alleles (98.9%). In total, 82 different mutations were present in the cohort. The most frequent mutation c.1315+1G>A (IVS12+1G>A) was found on 25.80% of the 744 alleles. Other very frequent mutations were c.1222C>T (p.R408W) (16.93%) and c.1241A>G (p.Y414C) (11.15%). Among the identified mutations, five mutations; c.532G>A (p.E178K), c.730C>T (p.P244S), c.925G>A (p.A309T), c.1228T>A (p.F410I), and c.1199+4A>G (IVS11+4A>G) have not been reported previously. The metabolic phenotypes of PKU are classified into four categories; 'classical PKU', 'moderate PKU', 'mild PKU' and 'mild hyperphenylalaninemia'. In this study, we assigned the phenotypic outcome of three of the five novel mutations and furthermore six not previously classified mutations to one of the four PKU categories.",3 1 0
"A phenylalanine hydroxylase amino acid polymorphism with implications for molecular diagnostics. || African Continental Ancestry Group Alleles Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Dose-Response Relationship, Drug Escherichia coli Exons Family Health Humans Kinetics Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Recombinant Proteins || Mutations in the gene encoding phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH, EC 1.14.16.1) are associated with various degrees of hyperphenylalaninemia, including classical phenylketonuria (PKU). We examined the PAH gene in a Brazilian PKU family of African origin and identified three missense variants, R252W (c.754C --> T), K274E (c.820A --> G), and I318T (c.953T --> C), the two latter of which were transmitted in cis. Expression analyses in two different in vitro systems showed that I318T is associated with profoundly decreased enzyme activity, whereas the enzyme activity of K274E is indistinguishable from that of the wild-type protein. Detailed kinetic analyses of PAH expressed in E. coli showed that the K274E mutant protein has kinetic properties similar to that of the wild-type protein. Population studies have suggested that the K274E variant occurs on approximately 4% of African-American PAH alleles, whereas the neonatal screening incidence of PKU among African Americans is only 1:100,000. This is to our knowledge the first demonstration of a PAH missense variant with no apparent association to PAH deficiency. Awareness of this common variant may be helpful to laboratories that perform molecular diagnosis of PAH deficiency in populations of African origin.",3 1 0
"Molecular pathology and enzyme processing in various phenotypes of acid maltase deficiency. || Adult Aged Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Fluorometry Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Golgi Apparatus Humans Infant Lymphocytes Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 1 Lysosomes Male Middle Aged Molecular Weight Muscle, Skeletal Phenotype alpha-Glucosidases || To examine at molecular, biochemical, and muscle pathology level the striking clinical heterogeneity resulting from acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency. We investigated 23 patients with infantile-onset or late-onset glycogen storage disease type II by enzyme activity, protein expression by immunoblotting, GAA gene mutations, and muscle pathology including immunolabeling for Golgi and sarcolemmal proteins. The enzyme activity was absent or minimal in infantile-onset cases and variably reduced in late-onset patients. Genotype-phenotype correlation (seven novel mutations were found) showed that most late-onset patients had the heterozygous IVS1 leaky splicing mutation (one patient was homozygous), but the course of the disease was often difficult to predict on the basis of the mutations alone. All patients showed an abnormal pattern of enzyme protein processing, with increased amounts of the inactive forms and very low or absent amounts of the mature forms. The molecular weight of the mature and the intermediate forms appeared higher in patients' samples than in the control muscle. We observed a Golgi proliferation in muscle fibers possibly caused by the retention of inactive forms of enzyme protein that cannot be correctly targeted from Golgi to lysosomes. The vacuolar membranes expressed sarcolemmal proteins in late-onset but not in infantile-onset patients, suggesting an extensive autophagy and vacuolar membrane remodeling in late-onset patients. The different protein molecular weight between patients and controls could be due to an excessive sialylation of mutant enzyme: this might be possibly caused by a delayed transport and longer transit of the inactive proteins in the Golgi apparatus.",3 1
"Identification of a PTEN mutation in a family with Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-Zonana syndrome. || Adult Child, Preschool Developmental Disabilities Female Genes, Tumor Suppressor Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Head Humans Middle Aged Pedigree Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction Syndrome || Cowden syndrome (CS) and Bannayan-Zonana syndrome (BZS) are two inherited hamartoma syndromes characterized by distinct phenotypic features. Mutations in the PTEN gene have been identified in patients with CS and BZS, suggesting the presence of a common genetic basis. We describe a single kindred with individuals manifesting both CS and BZS phenotypes (CS/BZS overlap family) in which we have identified a novel mutation in PTEN by DNA sequencing. We have confirmed these results by means of restriction enzyme analysis. The presence of individuals with CS and BZS within the same family, and moreover the identification of identical PTEN gene mutations in these individuals, suggest that these two syndromes represent different phenotypic expressions of one disease. Furthermore, these findings imply that, like patients with CS, individuals with BZS should be monitored for the onset of malignancy.",3
"Mutation profiles of phenylketonuria in Quebec populations: evidence of stratification and novel mutations. ||  || Independent phenylketonuria (PKU) chromosomes (n = 109) representing 80% of a proband cohort in Quebec province carry 18 different identified mutations in 20 different mutation/haplotype combinations. The study reported here, the third in a series on Quebec populations, was done in the Montreal region and predominantly on French Canadians. It has identified three novel mutations (A309D, D338Y, and 1054/1055delG[352fs]) and one unusual mutation/RFLP haplotype combination (E280K on Hp 2). The relative frequencies and distribution of PKU mutations were then compared in three regions and population subsets (eastern Quebec, French Canadian; western Quebec, French Canadian; and Montreal, non-French Canadian). The distributions of the prevalent and rare mutations are nonrandom and provide evidence for genetic stratification. The latter and the presence of eight unusual mutation/haplotype combinations in Quebec families with European ancestries (the aforementioned four and M1V, I65T, S349P, and R408W on Hp 1) corroborate demographic and anthropologic evidence, from elsewhere, for different origins of French Canadians in eastern and western Quebec.",3 1
"Fabry disease: renal sonographic and magnetic resonance imaging findings in affected males and carrier females with the classic and cardiac variant phenotypes. ||  || To describe the renal ultrasonography (US) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings in affected males and female carriers with the classic and cardiac variant phenotypes of Fabry disease (alpha-galactosidase A [alpha-Gal A] deficiency). The renal US and MRI features of 76 classically affected males (aged 7-53 years), 40 female carriers from classically affected families (aged 18-66 years), and 6 males with the cardiac variant phenotype (aged 17-59 years) were reviewed by 3 blinded board-certified radiologists. The images were evaluated for the presence of cortical cysts, parapelvic cysts, renal atrophy, decreased cortical thickness, increased echogenicity (US only), and decreased corticomedullary differentiation (MRI only). The consensus findings were analyzed with respect to the patients' sex, age, Fabry genotype and phenotype, and renal function. MRI was more sensitive than US in detecting radiographic abnormalities. In the 76 classically affected males, the most common US abnormalities were cysts (36.9%; cortical cysts = 22.4%, parapelvic cysts = 14.5%), increased echogenicity (17.1%), and decreased cortical thickness (11.9%), whereas the most common MRI abnormalities were cysts (47.3%; cortical cysts = 28.9%, parapelvic cysts = 18.4%), loss of corticomedullary differentiation (43.4%), and decreased cortical thickness (7.9%). Among the 40 female carriers, common US abnormalities included cysts (20%; cortical cysts = 10%, parapelvic cysts = 10%) and increased echogenicity (7.5%), whereas MRI findings included decreased corticomedullary differentiation (40%) and cysts (37.5%; cortical cysts = 20%; parapelvic cysts = 17.5%). Renal US and MRI were normal in 5 classically affected males aged 12 years or younger and 2 female carriers aged 20 years or younger. Among the 6 male cardiac variants, abnormal US findings included cysts (66.3%; cortical cysts = 50%, parapelvic cysts = 16.3%) and increased echogenicity (33.3%), whereas MRI detected decreased corticomedullary differentiation in all (100%) and cysts in 83% (cortical cysts = 66.7%; parapelvic cysts = 16.3%). Serum creatinine levels were elevated (>1.2 mg/dL) in 40.8% and 15% of the classically affected males and female carriers with US and/or MRI abnormalities compared with 14.8% and 0%, respectively, who had elevated serum creatinine levels but no detectable radiographic abnormalities. There was no association of alpha-Gal A genotype with type or frequency of abnormalities in classically affected patients. Among classically affected males and female carriers, renal US and/or MRI abnormalities were detected in 64.5% and 60%, respectively. The occurrence and number of abnormalities increased with age in affected males and female carriers. Cysts, particularly parapelvic cysts, were more common and appeared earlier than in the general population. No renal abnormalities were detected in classically affected males or female carriers <12 years or <20 years of age, respectively. Five of the 6 males with the later-onset milder cardiac variant phenotype had loss of corticomedullary differentiation on MRI. Renal imaging abnormalities were more frequent in older patients with elevated serum creatinine levels, regardless of alpha-Gal A genotype or Fabry phenotype.",3
"Phenylalanine hydroxylase gene mutations in phenylketonuria patients from India: identification of novel mutations that affect PAH RNA. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Female Humans Male Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias RNA Splice Sites Sequence Deletion || Analysis of seven Indian phenylketonuria families has revealed four novel mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene; two affected consensus splice sequence and the 3' UTR, respectively, while the other two were single base insertion and deletion mutations, respectively. A novel 3' splice site mutation c.168-2A>G resulted in the activation of a cryptic 3' splice site that generated a premature termination codon leading to very low levels of the mutant transcript, probably due to activation of the nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) pathway. This is probably the first report of PKU caused by the activation of NMD.",3 1
"[Clinical, biomedical , neurological and molecular study of 11 patients with new mutations in PAH gene]. ||  || PKU is an autosomal recessive disorder. There is a broad spectrum phenotype which depends mainly on residual enzymatic activity and also on other factors such as modifying genes and non-genetic factors. This fact makes us consider that a multidisciplinary study of these patients is necessary to improve knowledge of the condition. To establish phenotype-genotype correlation and classify nine new mutations according to severity. We evaluated the clinical data obtained from a multidisciplinary trial of 11 patients with PKU/HPA who presented with nine new mutations (P275S, P279fsdelC, V388delTG, N61/I62/T63fsdel5bp, P281S, P362T, H1OOR, I164V and Y168H) identified during a molecular study of the PAH gene done in Catalonia (Spain). In our patients the genotype is correlated with the biochemical phenotype whereas the cognitive phenotype depends on determining factors such as early diagnosis and diet. Therefore, although PKU may be considered to be a complex characteristic, the mutations in the PAH gene are the main determining factor of the metabolic phenotype of PKU. A multidisciplinary study is the best way to understand and control these patients.",3 1
"Two novel mutations in exon 11 of the PAH gene (V1163del TG and P362T) associated with classic phenylketonuira and mild phenylketonuria. Mutations in brief no. 143. Online. ||  || PKU is one of the commonest genetic disease in man, affecting 1/10,000 individuals. It presents a wide phenotypical spectrum, from classic PKU to moderate Hyperpheylalaninemia depending on the residual enzymatic activity. Two novel mutations 1163/1164delTG and P362T in exon 11 have been detected during the mutational screening of the PAH gene in 84 families. 1163/1164delTC can be confused with V388M if the mutational screening is performed with BsaAI restriction enzyme, this mutation in heterozigosis presents a moderate phenotype. P362T mutation in heterozigosis with V388M shows a classical PKU phenotype. We report here two new mutations in exon 11 of the PAH gene (GenBank U49897), V1163delTG and P362T (using cDNA sequence), detected during the analysis of 57 PKU and 36 HPA patients belonging to 84 unrelated families detected under a neonatal screening program performed in Catalonia.",3
"Prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in HER2+ breast cancer patients. || Adult Breast Neoplasms DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genes, erbB-2 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Middle Aged Multiplex Polymerase Chain Reaction Prevalence Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Young Adult || Breast cancer is the most frequent tumor in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a rare inherited cancer syndrome associated with germline mutations in the TP53 gene. Recent data show that breast cancer in germline TP53 mutation carriers is commonly HER2+ (63-83 %). We assessed the prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in a cohort of women with HER2+ breast cancer diagnosed age ≤50 years. We identified blood specimens from 213 women with primary invasive HER2+ breast cancer age ≤50 years from a single center. Exon grouping analysis sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification techniques were used to screen for germline TP53 mutations. Among 213 women with HER2+ breast cancer age ≤50 years, 3 (ages at diagnosis 23, 32, 44 years) were found to carry a TP53 mutation (1.4 %, 95 % CI 0.3-4.1 %). ER/PR status was not uniform. Two TP53 carriers met Chompret criteria for LFS; none met classic LFS criteria. Although two-thirds of breast cancers in women with TP53 mutations are HER2+, we observed a low prevalence of germline TP53 mutations among unselected young women with HER2+ breast cancer. Given the potential clinical impact, consideration of germline TP53 testing should be given to young women with HER2+ breast cancer, especially if family cancer history is notable.",3 4
"Molecular analysis of SLC26A4 gene in patients with nonsyndromic hearing loss and EVA: identification of two novel mutations in Brazilian patients. || Adolescent Adult Brazil Child Child, Preschool Connexins Female Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Mass Screening Membrane Transport Proteins Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Sequence Analysis, DNA Sulfate Transporters Young Adult || The SLC26A4 gene has been described as the second gene involved in most cases of sensorineural non-syndromic hearing loss, since the first is the GJB2 gene. Recessive mutations in the SLC26A4 gene encoding pendrin, an anion transporter, are responsible for non-syndromic hearing loss associated with an enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA) and Pendred syndrome, which causes early hearing loss and affects the thyroid gland. Typically, the hearing loss is profound and prelingual. However, in some individuals, hearing impairment may develop later in childhood and then progress. Over 200 different SLC26A4 mutations have been reported, with each ethnic population having its own distinctive mutant allele series including a few prevalent founder mutations. Perform the screening of the 20 coding exons of SLC26A4 gene in Brazilian deaf individuals with EVA. Among the 23 unrelated non-syndromic hearing loss Brazilian patients with EVA, in whom no deafness-causing mutations of the GJB2 gene, the direct sequencing was performed to screen the 20 exons and their flanking regions of the SLC26A4 gene. The sequencing results revealed 9 cases (39%) carrying 13 different SLC26A4 mutations, including 11 known mutations (279delT, V138F, T193I, IVS8+1G>A, T410M, Q413R, R409H, L445W, IVS15+5G>A, V609G, and R776C) and 2 novel mutation (G149R and P142L). The SLC26A4 mutations have a high carrying rate in non-syndromic hearing loss Brazilian patients. The identification of a disease-causing mutation can be used to establish a genotypic diagnosis and provide important information to the patients and their families.",3 1
"PTEN autoregulates its expression by stabilization of p53 in a phosphatase-independent manner. || Gene Expression Regulation Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans PTEN Phosphohydrolase Promoter Regions, Genetic Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue, deleted on chromosome 10) is a tumor suppressor with dual phosphatase activity and mutations of its gene, PTEN, have been associated with many sporadic cancers and heritable neoplasia syndromes, including Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome. However, accumulating evidence now shows that PTEN may have novel functions other than as a phosphatase. In the present study, we show that PTEN is able to autoregulate its expression through the stabilization of another tumor suppressor p53. We further show that PTEN enhances p53 transactivation, a relationship that requires the interaction between PTEN and p53 and is PTEN phosphatase independent. We show that cell lines from Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome patients with germ line PTEN promoter mutations in the vicinity of the p53-binding motifs have altered p53 regulation. This seems to be due to reduced PTEN stability and decreased PTEN-p53 interactions. Our data provide clues to better understand the regulation of PTEN expression and the possible mechanisms of the pathogenesis of the subset of Cowden syndrome individuals with germ line promoter variation and who lack mutations in the PTEN coding region and splice sites. Importantly, this mechanism also holds for those sporadic tumors that lack intragenic mutations but have hemizygous deletion of PTEN, which includes the promoter region as manifested by loss-of-heterozygosity of 10q markers. The importance of our observations is underlined by the broad spectrum of neoplasias that harbor somatic PTEN or p53 alterations, or both.",3 0
"Fabry or not Fabry--a question of ascertainment. || Fabry Disease Heterozygote Humans Mutation, Missense alpha-Galactosidase || ",2 4 3
"A novel, de novo germline TP53 mutation in a rare presentation of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome in the maxilla. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Chondrosarcoma Female Gene Amplification Genes, p53 Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Humans Immunohistochemistry Infant Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Maxillary Neoplasms Osteosarcoma Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || We undertook the genetic analysis of a classic Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) family with clustering of primary tumours including two maxillary sarcomas, a rare LFS site of tumour occurrence. Our aim was to investigate the presence of a specific type of TP53 mutation that could be associated with this unusual predilection of site for cancer occurrence. Mutational screening of the coding region of TP53 revealed an A>T transversion in codon 144 of exon 5 (CAG>CTG, Gln>Leu) in the germline of one of the three affected members, with loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the tumour tissue. All other affected members were negative for germline or somatic TP53 mutations. TP53 immunohistochemistry was uninformative. The mutation we report is a de novo constitutional TP53 mutation that has not been previously described in the literature. It could explain the more burdened phenotype of the affected patient (died at 21 months). Alternative mechanisms to explain the overall family phenotype are discussed.",3 4
"Founder effect of a prevalent phenylketonuria mutation in the Oriental population. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Base Sequence China Female Genotype Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Oligonucleotide Probes Pedigree Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || A missense mutation has been identified in the human phenylalanine hydroxylase [PAH; phenylalanine 4-monooxygenase; L-phenylalanine, tetrahydrobiopterin:oxygen oxidoreductase (4-hydroxylating), EC 1.14.16.1] gene in a Chinese patient with classic phenylketonuria (PKU). A G-to-C transition at the second base of codon 413 in exon 12 of the gene results in the substitution of Pro413 for Arg413 in the mutant protein. This mutation (R413P) results in negligible enzymatic activity when expressed in heterologous mammalian cells and is compatible with a classic PKU phenotype in the patient. Population genetic studies reveal that this mutation is tightly linked to restriction fragment length polymorphism haplotype 4, which is the predominant haplotype of the PAH locus in the Oriental population. It accounts for 13.8% of northern Chinese and 27% of Japanese PKU alleles, but it is rare in southern Chinese (2.2%) and is absent in the Caucasian population. The data demonstrate unambiguously that the mutation occurred after racial divergence of Orientals and Caucasians and suggest that the allele has spread throughout the Orient by a founder effect. Previous protein polymorphism studies in eastern Asia have led to the hypothesis that ""northern Mongoloids"" represented a founding population in Asia. Our results are compatible with this hypothesis in that the PKU mutation might have occurred in northern Mongoloids and subsequently spread to the Chinese and Japanese populations.",3 0
"Differential effect of DCA treatment on the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex in patients with severe PDHC deficiency. || Cells, Cultured Dichloroacetic Acid Dihydrolipoyllysine-Residue Acetyltransferase Enzyme Activation Female Fibroblasts Humans In Vitro Techniques Infant Lymphocytes Male Pyruvate Dehydrogenase (Lipoamide) Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency Disease Severity of Illness Index || Dichloroacetate (DCA) is a structural analog of pyruvate that has been recommended for the treatment of primary lactic acidemia, particularly in patients with pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDHC) deficiency. Recent reports have demonstrated that the response to DCA may depend on the type of molecular abnormality. In this study, we investigated the response to DCA in various PDHC-deficient cell lines and tried to determine the mechanism involved. The effect of chronic 3-d DCA treatment on PDHC activity was assessed in two PDHC-deficient cell lines, each with a different point mutation in the E1alpha subunit gene (R378C and R88C), and one cell line in which an 8-bp tandem repeat was deleted (W383 del). Only two (R378C and R88C) of the three PDHC-deficient cell lines with very low levels of PDHC activity and unstable polypeptides were sensitive to chronic DCA treatment. In these cell lines, DCA treatment resulted in an increase in PDHC activity by 125 and 70%, respectively, with concomitant increases of 121 and 130% in steady-state levels of immunoreactive E1alpha. DCA treatment reduced the turnover of the E1alpha subunit in R378C and R88C mutant cells with no significant effect on the E1beta subunit. Chronic DCA treatment significantly improved the metabolic function of PDHC in digitonin-permeabilized R378C and R88C fibroblasts. The occurrence of DCA-sensitive mutations suggests that DCA treatment is potentially useful as an adjuvant to ketogenic and vitamin treatment in PDHC-deficient patients.",3
"Genetic Screening of Mutations Associated with Fabry Disease in a Nationwide Cohort of Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis Patients. ||  || Fabry's disease (FD) is a lysosomal storage disorder associated with an alpha-galactosidase A deficiency. The prevalence of FD among juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) patients with established diagnosis is unknown, but as musculoskeletal pain may be an important complaint at presentation, misdiagnosed cases are anticipated. With this study, we aim to calculate the frequency of FD-associated mutations in a cohort of JIA patients. Children with JIA from a national cohort were selected. Clinical and laboratorial information was recorded in the Portuguese rheumatic diseases register (http://Reuma.pt). Molecular genetic testing to detect GLA gene mutations was performed. After the multiplex polymerase chain reactions technique for DNA amplification, direct sequencing of the complete sequence ofGLA gene was completed. From a cohort of 292 patients with JIA (188 females, 104 males), mutations were identified in 5 patients (all female). Four patients had the mutation D313Y, a rareGLA variant, which is associated with low enzymatic levels in plasma, but normal lysosomal levels. One patient presented the missense mutation R118C, which was previously described in Mediterranean patients with FD. This is the first screening of FD mutations in a cohort of JIA patients. No ""classic"" pathogenic FD mutations were reported. The late-onset FD-associated mutation, R118C, was found in a frequency of 0.34% (1/292).",3
"Mutational spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in patients with phenylketonuria in the central region of China. || Alleles Biopterin Child Child, Preschool China Exons Female Genetic Association Studies Genotype High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Introns Male Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Severity of Illness Index || Phenylketonuria (PKU, OMIM 261600) caused by phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disease that is characterized by abnormalities of phenylalanine metabolism. In this study, a total of 77 patients, originating from the central region of China and who were diagnosed with PAH deficiency at the third affiliated hospital of Zhengzhou University, were enrolled in this study. The 13 exons and 12 flanking introns of the PAH gene were analyzed by Sanger sequencing and next generation sequencing. The sequencing data were aligned to the hg19, PAHvdb and HGMD databases to characterize the genotypes of PKU patients, and genotype-phenotype correlations and BH4 responsiveness predictions were performed using BIOPKUdb. In total, 149 alleles were characterized among the 154 PKU alleles. These mutations were located in exons 2-13, and intron 12 of the PAH gene, with a relative frequency of ≥5%, for EX6-96A>G, p.R241C, p.R243Q, p.V399V and p.R53H. Additionally, a novel variant, p.D84G, was identified. The genotype correlated with clinical symptoms in 33.3-100% of the cases, depending on the disease severity, and BH4 responsiveness predictions show that only five patients with MHP-PKU and one patient with Mild-PKU were predicted to be BH4 responsive. In conclusion, we have characterized the mutational spectrum of PAH in the central region of China and have identified a novel mutation. The hotspot mutation information might be useful for screening, diagnosis and treatment of PKU.",3
"BH4-sensitive hyperphenylalaninemia: new case and review of literature. || Biopterin Humans Infant Male Phenylalanine Phenylketonurias || We report a patient with BH(4)-sensitive phenylketonuria. In neonatal screening, phenylalanine levels above 10 mg/dl were detected. In the tetrahydrobiopterin- (BH(4)) loading test, phenylalanine concentrations in serum fell significantly. Dihydropteridine reductase activity in blood, pterines, and neurotransmitters in cerebrospinal fluid, as well as pterines in urine were all normal. Mutation analysis revealed compound-heterozygosity for the mutations R408W and K320N. Under BH(4)-supplementation without a specific phenylalanine-reduced diet, phenylalanine-concentrations are in the therapeutic range and our patient developed normally.",3 1
"Germ-line TP53 mutations in Finnish cancer families exhibiting features of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome and negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2. || BRCA2 Protein Female Finland Genes, BRCA1 Genes, p53 Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Neoplasm Proteins Neoplasms Pedigree Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Transcription Factors || Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for a large portion of the inherited predisposition to breast and ovarian cancer. It was recently discovered that mutations in these two genes are less common in the Finnish population than expected. Because the genetic background of breast cancer, in particular, is largely obscure, it became necessary to search for mutations in other susceptibility genes. Because seven of our BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation-negative families fulfilled the criteria of either Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) or Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFL), we decided to screen them for germ-line TP53 mutations in exons 5-8 using a dual-temperature single-strand conformation polymorphism assay (SSCP). Two missense mutations (Asn235Ser and Tyr220Cys) were identified. The clinical significance of these findings was evaluated by comparison to previously reported germ-line TP53 mutation data, and by using the tumor loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis. In addition, an immunohistochemical analysis of tumor specimens from mutation-positive individuals was performed. Our results suggest that the observed missense mutations confer susceptibility to cancer, and that germ-line TP53 mutations would therefore explain an additional fraction of hereditary breast cancer in Finland.",2 3
"The natural course of infantile Pompe's disease: 20 original cases compared with 133 cases from the literature. || Blood Chemical Analysis Brain Cardiomegaly Child Development Disease Progression Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Infant, Premature Mutation Netherlands Survival Analysis alpha-Glucosidases || Infantile Pompe's disease is a lethal cardiac and muscular disorder. Current developments toward enzyme replacement therapy are promising. The aim of our study is to delineate the natural course of the disease to verify endpoints of clinical studies. A total of 20 infantile patients diagnosed by the collaborative Dutch centers and 133 cases reported in literature were included in the study. Information on clinical history, physical examination, and diagnostic parameters was collected. The course of Pompe's disease is essentially the same in the Dutch and the general patient population. Symptoms start at a median age of 1.6 months in both groups. The median age of death is 7.7 and 6 months, respectively. Five percent of the Dutch patients and 8% of all reported patients survive beyond 1 year of age. Only 2 patients from literature became older than 18 months. A progressive cardiac hypertrophy is characteristic for infantile Pompe's disease. The diastolic thickness of the left ventricular posterior wall and cardiac weight at autopsy increase significantly with age. Motor development is severely delayed and major developmental milestones are generally not achieved. For the Dutch patient group, growth deviates significantly from normal despite start of nasogastric tube feeding. Levels of aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase, or creatine kinase-myocardial band isoenzyme are typically elevated, although aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and lactate dehydrogenase increase significantly with age. The patients have fully deleterious mutations. Acid alpha-glucosidase activity is severely deficient. Survival, decrease of the diastolic thickness of the left ventricular posterior wall, and achievement of major motor milestones are valid endpoints for therapeutic studies of infantile Pompe's disease. Mutation analysis and measurement of the alpha-glucosidase activity should be part of the enrollment program.",3 1
"De novo loss- or gain-of-function mutations in KCNA2 cause epileptic encephalopathy. || Adult Amino Acid Sequence Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Epilepsy Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Infant Kv1.2 Potassium Channel Male Mutation Pedigree Spasms, Infantile Young Adult || Epileptic encephalopathies are a phenotypically and genetically heterogeneous group of severe epilepsies accompanied by intellectual disability and other neurodevelopmental features. Using next-generation sequencing, we identified four different de novo mutations in KCNA2, encoding the potassium channel KV1.2, in six isolated patients with epileptic encephalopathy (one mutation recurred three times independently). Four individuals presented with febrile and multiple afebrile, often focal seizure types, multifocal epileptiform discharges strongly activated by sleep, mild to moderate intellectual disability, delayed speech development and sometimes ataxia. Functional studies of the two mutations associated with this phenotype showed almost complete loss of function with a dominant-negative effect. Two further individuals presented with a different and more severe epileptic encephalopathy phenotype. They carried mutations inducing a drastic gain-of-function effect leading to permanently open channels. These results establish KCNA2 as a new gene involved in human neurodevelopmental disorders through two different mechanisms, predicting either hyperexcitability or electrical silencing of KV1.2-expressing neurons.",3
"Genotype, phenotype and disease severity reflected by serum LysoGb3 levels in patients with Fabry disease. || Adult Biomarkers Cohort Studies Fabry Disease Female Genotype Glycolipids Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Severity of Illness Index Sphingolipids alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is a rare X-linked lysosomal storage disease caused by mutations in the α-galactosidase A (GLA) gene causing deficiency of α-galactosidase A which results in progressive glycosphingolipid accumulation, especially globotriaosylceramide (Gb3), in body liquids and lysosomes. In a large cohort of FD patients, we aimed to establish genotype/phenotype relations as indicated by serum LysoGb3 (deacylated Gb3). In 69 consecutive adult FD patients (males: n=28 (41%)) with a GLA-mutation confirmed diagnosis, we conducted a multidisciplinary clinical characterization during their routine annual examinations, and measured serum LysoGb3 levels by high-sensitive electrospray ionization liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Serum levels of LysoGb3 were significantly higher in Classic compared with Later-Onset phenotype and higher in the latter compared with controls, both in males (52 [40-83] vs 9.5 [4.5-20] vs 0.47 [0.41-0.61] ng/ml, P<0.001) and in females (9.9 [7.9-14] vs 4.9 [1.6-4.9] vs 0.41 [0.33-0.48] ng/ml, P<0.001), respectively. Multivariate linear regression analysis showed that LysoGb3 levels were independently associated with, serum creatinine (β=0.09, 95%CI 0.04-0.13, P<0.001) and the presence of cardiomyopathy (β=25, 95%CI 9.8-41, P=0.002). LysoGb3 levels were higher in males with frame-shift and nonsense mutations than in males with missense mutations (84 [72-109] vs 41 [37-52] ng/ml, P=0.002). LysoGb3 relates to disease severity, enzyme replacement response, and to the genotype severity in males. LysoGb3 supports identifying patients at risk who require intensive monitoring and treatment. LysoGb3 appears to be one marker of metabolic phenotyping of FD.",3
"Nature and frequency of mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A gene that cause Fabry disease. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Chromosome Deletion Cloning, Molecular DNA DNA Primers Fabry Disease Female Gene Frequency Gene Rearrangement Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction RNA Transcription, Genetic X Chromosome alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease, an X-linked inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism, results from mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A) gene at Xq22.1. To determine the nature and frequency of the molecular lesions causing the classical and milder-variant Fabry phenotypes, and for precise carrier detection in Fabry families, the alpha-Gal A transcripts or genomic sequences from unrelated Fabry hemizygotes were analyzed. In patients with the classical phenotype, 18 new mutations were identified: N34S, C56G, W162R, R227Q, R227X, D264V, D266V, S297F, D313Y, G328A, W340X, E398X, IVS2+2, IVS5 delta-2,3, 773 delta 2, 954 delta 5, 1016 delta 11, and 1123 delta 53. Unrelated asymptomatic or mildly affected patients with symptoms confined to the heart had a missense mutation, N215S, that expressed residual enzymatic activity. Related, moderately affected patients with late-onset cardiac and pulmonary manifestations had a small deletion, 1208 delta 3, that predicted the in-frame deletion of arginine 404 near the terminus of the 429 residue enzyme polypeptide. In addition, five small gene rearrangements involving exonic sequences were identified in unrelated classically affected patients. Two small deletions and one small duplication had short direct repeats at their respective breakpoint junctions and presumably resulted from slipped mispairing. A deletion occurred at a potential polymerase alpha arrest site, while the breakpoints of another deletion occurred at an inverted tetranucleotide repeat. Screening of unrelated Fabry patients with allele-specific oligonucleotides for seven mutations revealed that these were private, with the notable exception of N215S, R227Q, and R227X, which were each found in several unrelated families from different ethnic backgrounds. The CpG dinucleotide at codon 227 was the most common site of mutation, having been altered in 5% of the 148 unrelated Fabry alleles. These studies revealed that most alpha-Gal A lesions were private, that codon 227 was a mutational hot spot, and that certain mutations predicted a milder disease phenotype.",3
"Targeted massively parallel sequencing of autism spectrum disorder-associated genes in a case control cohort reveals rare loss-of-function risk variants. ||  || Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is highly heritable, yet genome-wide association studies (GWAS), copy number variation screens, and candidate gene association studies have found no single factor accounting for a large percentage of genetic risk. ASD trio exome sequencing studies have revealed genes with recurrent de novo loss-of-function variants as strong risk factors, but there are relatively few recurrently affected genes while as many as 1000 genes are predicted to play a role. As such, it is critical to identify the remaining rare and low-frequency variants contributing to ASD. We have utilized an approach of prioritization of genes by GWAS and follow-up with massively parallel sequencing in a case-control cohort. Using a previously reported ASD noise reduction GWAS analyses, we prioritized 837 RefSeq genes for custom targeting and sequencing. We sequenced the coding regions of those genes in 2071 ASD cases and 904 controls of European white ancestry. We applied comprehensive annotation to identify single variants which could confer ASD risk and also gene-based association analysis to identify sets of rare variants associated with ASD. We identified a significant over-representation of rare loss-of-function variants in genes previously associated with ASD, including a de novo premature stop variant in the well-established ASD candidate gene RBFOX1. Furthermore, ASD cases were more likely to have two damaging missense variants in candidate genes than controls. Finally, gene-based rare variant association implicates genes functioning in excitatory neurotransmission and neurite outgrowth and guidance pathways including CACNAD2, KCNH7, and NRXN1. We find suggestive evidence that rare variants in synaptic genes are associated with ASD and that loss-of-function mutations in ASD candidate genes are a major risk factor, and we implicate damaging mutations in glutamate signaling receptors and neuronal adhesion and guidance molecules. Furthermore, the role of de novo mutations in ASD remains to be fully investigated as we identified the first reported protein-truncating variant in RBFOX1 in ASD. Overall, this work, combined with others in the field, suggests a convergence of genes and molecular pathways underlying ASD etiology.",3
"Ten novel mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) observed in Brazilian patients with phenylketonuria. ||  || In the present study we report on the identification of ten novel mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene of Brazilian patients with phenylketonuria (PKU): IVS5-54A>G, IVS6+17G>T, E205A, F240S, K274E, I318T, L321L, C357G, IVS11+17G>A and S411X. These mutations were detected during the characterization of the PAH genotypes of 115 patients with PKU from the southeast region of Brazil. The results obtained confirm the high heterogeneity of the PAH gene and provide information about the distribution of PKU mutations in the Brazilian population.",3 1
"PAH gene mutations in the Sicilian population: association with minihaplotypes and expression analysis. || Alleles Animals Blotting, Northern COS Cells Child DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic Genotype Haplotypes Humans Male Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic RNA, Messenger Recombinant Fusion Proteins Sicily || The molecular basis of PAH deficiency in the Sicilian population is characterized by a marked heterogeneity, with 44 mutations at a single locus identified by a ""gene-scanning"" approach and accounting for a detection rate of 91%. The remaining 9% of PAH alleles does not bear mutations in any of the 13 exons and 24 exon/intron junctions. Three mutations IVS10nt-11 G > A, R261Q, and A300S accounted for 30.5%, whereas the remaining mutations were found at relative frequencies of less than 5% and 20 mutations were observed once only. Five mutations have been detected only in Sicilians so far. By studying the association of mutations with intragenic STR-VNTR haplotypes (""minihaplotypes""), ""identity by descent"" has been established for 24 mutations also detected in other populations. This finding supports the hypothesis of a multipolar origin for a large proportion of PAH mutant alleles currently detected in Sicilians. In order to improve our understanding of the clinical heterogeneity of PAH deficiency in this population, we have for the first time analyzed three missense mutations L41F, T92I, and P211T in vitro by the pCDNA3/COS-7 eukaryotic expression system and found an activity of 10, 76, and 72%, respectively, compared to normal PAH. In two HPA patients with mild PKU and mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP), harboring respectively L41F/R261Q and T92I/P281L genotypes, the predicted biochemical effect of these genotypes appeared to be consistent with the metabolic phenotypes. In contrast, discordant metabolic phenotypes (mild PKU and MHP) were observed in two unrelated patients bearing the same R261Q/P211T genotype, a finding which underscores the complex relationship linking genotype to phenotype in PAH deficiency. Hypotheses on the possible mechanisms responsible for the observed discordance are discussed. The spectrum of PAH gene mutations in Sicily reflects the complex demographic history of this island at the crossroad of prehistoric and historical migrations in the Mediterranean sea. The data presented in this study also add to the present knowledge on the relationship between PAH genotypes and HPA phenotype and are expected to improve PAH genotyping among individuals with hyperphenylalaninemia.",3 1 0
"Predicting cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM) status in Pompe disease using GAA mutations: lessons learned from 10 years of clinical laboratory testing experience. || Antibody Formation Cells, Cultured Cross Reactions Enzyme Replacement Therapy Ethnic Groups Fibroblasts Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunomodulation Infant Infant, Newborn Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) for Pompe disease using recombinant acid alpha-glucosidase (rhGAA) has resulted in increased survival although the clinical response is variable. Cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM)-negative status has been recognized as a poor prognostic factor. CRIM-negative patients make no GAA protein and develop sustained high antibody titers to ERT that render the treatment ineffective. Antibody titers are generally low for the majority of CRIM-positive patients and there is typically a better clinical outcome. Because immunomodulation has been found to be most effective in CRIM-negative patients prior to, or shortly after, initiation of ERT, knowledge of CRIM status is important before ERT is begun. We have analyzed 243 patients with infantile Pompe disease using a Western blot method for determining CRIM status and using cultured skin fibroblasts. Sixty-one out of 243 (25.1%) patients tested from various ethnic backgrounds were found to be CRIM-negative. We then correlated the CRIM results with GAA gene mutations where available (52 CRIM-negative and 88 CRIM-positive patients). We found that, in most cases, CRIM status can be predicted from GAA mutations, potentially circumventing the need for invasive skin biopsy and time wasted in culturing cells in the future. Continued studies in this area will help to increase the power of GAA gene mutations in predicting CRIM status as well as possibly identifying CRIM-positive patients who are at risk for developing high antibody titers.",3 1 4 0
"Analysis of prevalence and degree of macrocephaly in patients with germline PTEN mutations and of brain weight in Pten knock-in murine model. || Adolescent Adult Animals Brain Child Child, Preschool Disease Models, Animal Exons Female Gene Knock-In Techniques Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Megalencephaly Mice Mice, Transgenic Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Sex Factors Young Adult || PTEN Hamartoma Tumour Syndrome (PHTS) includes Cowden syndrome (CS), Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS), and other conditions resulting from germline mutation of the PTEN tumour suppressor gene. Although macrocephaly, presumably due to megencephaly, is found in both CS and BRRS, the prevalence and degree have not been formally assessed in PHTS. We evaluated head size in a prospective nested series of 181 patients found to have pathogenic germline PTEN mutations. Clinical data including occipital-frontal circumference (OFC) measurement were requested for all participants. Macrocephaly was present in 94% of 161 evaluable PHTS individuals. In patients ≤ 18 years, mean OFC was +4.89 standard deviations (SD) above the population mean with no difference between genders (P = 0.7). Among patients >18 years, average OFC was 60.0 cm in females and 62.8 cm in males (P < 0.0001). To systematically determine whether macrocephaly was due to megencephaly, we examined Pten(M3M4) missense mutant mice generated and maintained on mixed backgrounds. Mice were killed at various ages, brains were dissected out and weighed. Average brain weight for Pten(M3M4) homozygous mice (N = 15) was 1.02 g compared with 0.57 g for heterozygous mice (N = 29) and 0.49 g for wild-type littermates (N = 24) (P < 0.0001). Macrocephaly, secondary to megencephaly, is an important component of PHTS and more prevalent than previously appreciated. Patients with PHTS have increased risks for breast and thyroid cancers, and early diagnosis is key to initiating timely screening to reduce patient morbidity and mortality. Clinicians should consider germline PTEN testing at an early point in the diagnostic work-up for patients with extreme macrocephaly.",3
"A novel germline mutation of the PTEN gene in a patient with macrocephaly, ventricular dilatation, and features of VATER association. || Abnormalities, Multiple Base Sequence Craniofacial Abnormalities Dilatation, Pathologic Genetic Heterogeneity Germ-Line Mutation Heart Ventricles Heterozygote Humans Limb Deformities, Congenital Male Mutation, Missense PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phenotype Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Mutations of the PTEN gene are associated with hamartoma-neoplasia syndromes. While germline mutations at this chromosome 10q22-23 locus have been observed in patients with Cowden syndrome (CS) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRR), both of which phenotypes are associated with hamartomata and neoplasia, somatic mutation of PTEN has been established in a wide variety of sporadically occurring neoplasia. CS and BRR share some clinical features, specifically hamartomata and lipomatosis. Investigation of other clinically distinct syndromes associated with lipomatosis and overgrowth has established germline and germline mosaic PTEN mutations in several patients with Proteus syndrome. To this expanding array of clinically distinct phenotypes associated with PTEN mutations, we now report a novel heterozygous germline mutation, H61D, in a patient with features of VATER association with macrocephaly and ventriculomegaly.",3
"The spectrum of phenylalanine variations under tetrahydrobiopterin load in subjects affected by phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. ||  || A fall in blood phenylalanine (Phe) after tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) administration is a common trait in phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH, EC 1.14.16.1) deficiency (McKusick 261600). To explore the extent and biological correlates of this phenomenon we studied: (a) the spectrum of BH(4) response in patients with PAH deficiency; (b) the variability of BH(4) response according to the severity of the biochemical phenotype; and (c) the variability of the response to BH(4) in subjects with the same genotype. Fifty PAH-deficient subjects (age 1 month-35 years) were enrolled for the study (5 with mild hyperphenylalaninaemia (MHPHE), 15 with mild phenylketonuria (MPKU) and 30 with classic phenylketonuria (CPKU) and underwent an identical schedule of blood samplings 24 h before and after oral BH(4) challenge (6(R)-BH4, 20 mg/kg per day), leaving Phe intake unchanged. The effect of BH(4) on blood Phe concentration was evaluated according to the percent decrease of Phe during the 24 h following the challenge (criterion a), and as variation exceeding the individual variability of blood Phe (criterion b). The number of BH(4)-responders according to criterion b was 31 (including all the 14 detected by criterion a): 17 out of 30 CPKU (57%), 9 out of 15 MPKU (60%), and all the MHPHE subjects (chi(2) = 3.45, df = 2, p = 0.178). The effect of BH(4) showed a large interindividual variability unrelated to diagnostic classification, basal value of blood Phe, maximum percentage of Phe reduction, Phe intake, and genotype. Some inconsistencies were found in patients with identical genotype. The first responsive case homozygous for the severe R408W mutation was found. Two new mutations, Y387X and G352C, were identified (the former was BH(4)-responsive), and the responsiveness of three already reported mutations (R261Q, D338Y, T92I) was substantiated.",3 1
"Genotype-phenotype associations in French patients with phenylketonuria and importance of genotype for full assessment of tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness. || Biopterin Cohort Studies Female France Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Male Phenotype Phenylketonurias Treatment Outcome || Mutations in Phenylalanine Hydroxylase (PAH) gene cause phenylketonuria. Sapropterin (BH4), the enzyme cofactor, is an important therapeutical strategy in phenylketonuria. However, PAH is a highly polymorphic gene and it is difficult to identify BH4-responsive genotypes. We seek here to improve prediction of BH4-responsiveness through comparison of genotypes, BH4-loading test, predictions of responsiveness according to the literature and types and locations of mutations. A total of 364 French patients among which, 9 % had mild hyperphenylalaninemia, 17.7 % mild phenylketonuria and 73.1 % classical phenylketonuria, benefited from a 24-hour BH4-loading test and had the PAH gene sequenced and analyzed by Multiplex Ligation Probe Amplification. Overall, 31.6 % of patients were BH4-responsive. The number of different mutations found was 127, including 26 new mutations. The mutations c.434A > T, c.500A > T, c.529G > C, c.1045 T > G and c.1196 T > C were newly classified as being BH4-responsive. We identified 261 genotypes, among which 46 were newly recognized as being BH4-responsive. Even though patients carry 2 responsive alleles, BH4-responsiveness cannot be predicted with certainty unless they present mild hyperphenylalaninemia. BH4-responsiveness cannot be predicted in patients carrying one responsive mutation only. In general, the milder the phenotype is, the stronger the BH4-response is. Almost exclusively missense mutations, particularly in exons 12, 11 and 8, are associated with BH4-responsiveness and any other type of mutation predicts a negative response. This study is the first of its kind, in a French population, to identify the phenotype associated with several combinations of PAH mutations. As others, it highlights the necessity of performing simultaneously BH4 loading test and molecular analysis in monitoring phenylketonuria patients.",3 1
"Protean PTEN: form and function. || Animals Disease Models, Animal Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Mice PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Proteus Syndrome Signal Transduction Structure-Activity Relationship Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Germline mutations distributed across the PTEN tumor-suppressor gene have been found to result in a wide spectrum of phenotypic features. Originally shown to be a major susceptibility gene for both Cowden syndrome (CS), which is characterized by multiple hamartomas and an increased risk of breast, thyroid, and endometrial cancers, and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, which is characterized by lipomatosis, macrocephaly, and speckled penis, the PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome spectrum has broadened to include Proteus syndrome and Proteus-like syndromes. Exon 5, which encodes the core motif, is a hotspot for mutations likely due to the biology of the protein. PTEN is a major lipid 3-phosphatase, which signals down the PI3 kinase/AKT pro-apoptotic pathway. Furthermore, PTEN is a protein phosphatase, with the ability to dephosphorylate both serine and threonine residues. The protein-phosphatase activity has also been shown to regulate various cell-survival pathways, such as the mitogen-activated kinase (MAPK) pathway. Although it is well established that PTEN's lipid-phosphatase activity, via the PI3K/AKT pathway, mediates growth suppression, there is accumulating evidence that the protein-phosphatase/MAPK pathway is equally important in the mediation of growth arrest and other crucial cellular functions.",3 0
"The phenylalanine hydroxylase c.30C>G synonymous variation (p.G10G) creates a common exonic splicing silencer. || Alternative Splicing Amino Acid Motifs Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Genes, Reporter Heterogeneous-Nuclear Ribonucleoprotein Group F-H Humans Molecular Sequence Data Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Protein Binding Silencer Elements, Transcriptional Trinucleotide Repeats beta-Hexosaminidase beta Chain || PKU is caused by mutations in PAH. A c.30C>G synonymous variation in exon 1, previously reported as neutral, was observed in two patients. The variation creates a GGG triplet, which is part of several exonic splicing silencer (ESS) motifs. Because the 5'-splice site of PAH exon 1 is intrinsically weak and therefore could be responsive to a new flanking ESS, we hypothesized that c.30C>G could cause aberrant mRNA splicing. We demonstrate that c.30C>G causes aberrant mRNA splicing in two different reporter minigenes, and that this is abolished if a preexisting flanking GGG triplet is disrupted. GGG triplets are part of the consensus motif bound by splicing-inhibitory hnRNPH proteins and we observed a dramatic increase in hnRNPH binding to c.30C>G PAH RNA. We conclude that c.30C>G creates a hnRNPH-binding ESS, which can disrupt mRNA splicing. A disease-causing mutation in HEXB, which has previously been associated with exon skipping in patients also creates a GGG triplet. We show that the mutant HEXB motif causes exon skipping of a reporter minigene and that this is also influenced by a flanking GGG triplet. We suggest that aberrant splicing caused by creation/abolishment of GGG triplets located together with a preexisting flanking GGG triplet, may be an underreported cause of human disease. It is important to recognize that exonic sequence changes may disrupt mRNA splicing. This is particularly important in PAH, since PKU patients harboring such mutations are unlikely to respond to therapy with 6R-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)), despite the fact that the genetic code indicates otherwise.",3 1 0
"Disease course in patients with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa due to the USH2A gene. ||  || To estimate the mean rates of ocular function loss in patients with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa due to USH2A mutations. In 125 patients with USH2A mutations, longitudinal regression was used to estimate mean rates of change in Snellen visual acuity, Goldmann visual field area (V4e white test light), and 30-Hz (cone) full-field electroretinogram amplitude. These rates were compared with those of previously studied cohorts with dominant retinitis pigmentosa due to RHO mutations and with X-linked retinitis pigmentosa due to RPGR mutations. Rates of change in patients with the Cys759Phe mutation, the USH2A mutation associated with nonsyndromic disease, were compared with rates of change in patients with the Glu767fs mutation, the most common USH2A mutation associated with Usher syndrome type II (i.e., retinitis pigmentosa and hearing loss). Mean annual exponential rates of decline for the USH2A patients were 2.6% for visual acuity, 7.0% for visual field area, and 13.2% for electroretinogram amplitude. The rate of acuity loss fell between the corresponding rates for the RHO and RPGR patients, whereas the rates for field and ERG amplitude loss were faster than those for the RHO and RPGR patients. No significant differences were found for patients with the Cys759Phe mutation versus patients with the Glu767fs mutation. On average, USH2A patients lose visual acuity faster than RHO patients and slower than RPGR patients. USH2A patients lose visual field and cone electroretinogram amplitude faster than patients with RHO or RPGR mutations. Patients with a nonsyndromic USH2A mutation have the same retinal disease course as patients with syndromic USH2A disease.",3 1
"CDH1 germline mutations and hereditary lobular breast cancer. || Antigens, CD Breast Neoplasms Cadherins Carcinoma, Lobular Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Heterozygote Humans Mutation Rate || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer is an autosomal dominant inherited disease associated of CDH1 germline mutations (that encodes for the E-cadherin protein), and lobular breast cancer is the second most frequent type of neoplasia. Recently, novel E-cadherin constitutional alterations have been identified in pedigree clustering only for lobular breast carcinoma without evidence of diffuse gastric tumors and in absence of BRCA1/2 mutations. This first evidence opens novel questions about the inherited correlation between diffuse gastric and lobular breast cancers. In this brief review we revise the literature data about the CDH1 mutation frequency affecting exclusively lobular breast cancer, providing clinical recommendation for asymptomatic mutation carriers.",3
"Germline mutations in CDH1 are infrequent in women with early-onset or familial lobular breast cancers. || Adult Age of Onset Antigens, CD Breast Neoplasms Cadherins Carcinoma, Lobular DNA Mutational Analysis Family Female Germ-Line Mutation Humans Middle Aged || Germline mutations in CDH1 are associated with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer; lobular breast cancer also occurs excessively in families with such condition. To determine if CDH1 is a susceptibility gene for lobular breast cancer in women without a family history of diffuse gastric cancer, germline DNA was analysed for the presence of CDH1 mutations in 318 women with lobular breast cancer who were diagnosed before the age of 45 years or had a family history of breast cancer and were not known, or known not, to be carriers of germline mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2. Cases were ascertained through breast cancer registries and high-risk cancer genetic clinics (Breast Cancer Family Registry, the kConFab and a consortium of breast cancer genetics clinics in the United States and Spain). Additionally, Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification was performed for 134 cases to detect large deletions. No truncating mutations and no large deletions were detected. Six non-synonymous variants were found in seven families. Four (4/318 or 1.3%) are considered to be potentially pathogenic through in vitro and in silico analysis. Potentially pathogenic germline CDH1 mutations in women with early-onset or familial lobular breast cancer are at most infrequent.",3 4 0
"Rapid mutation screening of phenylketonuria by polymerase chain reaction-linked restriction enzyme assay and direct sequence of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene: clinical application in northern Japan and northern China. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool China DNA Mutational Analysis Feasibility Studies Genotype Haplotypes Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Introns Japan Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Sequence Analysis, DNA || We describe a simple and technically feasible method for mutation screening of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene and its application to Japanese and Chinese patients with hyperphenylalaninemia. The strategy is based on the identification of a nucleotide substitution by restriction enzyme analysis, coupled with PCR and direct sequencing of exon 7 of the PAH gene. Because the detection of various mutations can proceed simultaneously using the same technique, it is quite rapid and reproducible, making it possible to perform effective molecular diagnosis and carrier screening in most laboratories. Using this procedure, we found that the most common molecular defects were R413P in Hokkaido, Japan (35 %) and R243Q in Heilongjiang, China (50%). R111X, IVS4nt-1, and five mutations in exon 7 (R241C, R243Q, R252W, A259T, and S273P) accounted for 55% of phenylketonuria (PKU) alleles in Hokkaido. In Heilongjiang, the R111X, Y356X, and R408W mutations accounted for 35% of PKU alleles. Clinically, homozygotes or compound heterozygotes of null alleles, which express nonfunctional enzyme activity, were all associated with classic PKU. On the other hand, patients heterozygous for the R241C allele had a benign phenotype of mild hyperphenylalaninemia. The DNA diagnosis in early infancy can predict various PKU phenotypes, and can prove useful in decision-making concerning dietary therapy.",3 1
"Multiple malignancies in a child with de novo TP53 mutation. || Child Disease Progression Humans Male Mutation Neoplasms, Multiple Primary Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || The authors present the case of an 8.5-year-old boy diagnosed with embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma of the infratemporal fossa at 21 months old. Five years later he developed an osteosarcoma of the tibia, for which he was treated with standard chemotherapy and resection. Soon after completing this treatment, ptosis of the right eye developed. A mass in the cavernous sinus was found, interpreted as an osteogenic metastatsis, although a third primary tumor could not be ruled out. Molecular genetic investigation revealed a de novo germline TP53 mutation, and heralded an aggressive clinical progression of multiple malignancies in a child.",3
"Mutation of a gene encoding a protein with extracellular matrix motifs in Usher syndrome type IIa. || Amino Acid Sequence Animals Cell Adhesion Molecules Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 1 Cochlea Epidermal Growth Factor Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Fibronectins Frameshift Mutation Gene Expression Genes, Recessive Glycosylation Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Laminin Male Molecular Sequence Data Pedigree Retina Retinitis Pigmentosa Syndrome Tumor Cells, Cultured || Usher syndrome type IIa (OMIM 276901), an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss and progressive retinitis pigmentosa, maps to the long arm of human chromosome 1q41 between markers AFM268ZD1 and AFM144XF2. Three biologically important mutations in Usher syndrome type IIa patients were identified in a gene (USH2A) isolated from this critical region. The USH2A gene encodes a protein with a predicted size of 171.5 kilodaltons that has laminin epidermal growth factor and fibronectin type III motifs; these motifs are most commonly observed in proteins comprising components of the basal lamina and extracellular matrixes and in cell adhesion molecules.",2 1 3
"Prediction of functionally significant single nucleotide polymorphisms in PTEN tumor suppressor gene: An in silico approach. || Computational Biology Data Mining Humans Molecular Dynamics Simulation Mutation, Missense PTEN Phosphohydrolase Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Protein Conformation || The phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) gene plays a crucial role in signal transduction by negatively regulating the PI3K signaling pathway. It is the most frequent mutated gene in many human-related cancers. Considering its critical role, a functional analysis of missense mutations of PTEN gene was undertaken in this study. Thirty five nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) within the coding region of the PTEN gene were selected for our in silico investigation, and five nsSNPs (G129E, C124R, D252G, H61D, and R130G) were found to be deleterious based on combinatorial predictions of different computational tools. Moreover, molecular dynamics (MD) simulation was performed to investigate the conformational variation between native and all the five mutant PTEN proteins having predicted deleterious nsSNPs. The results of MD simulation of all mutant models illustrated variation in structural attributes such as root-mean-square deviation, root-mean-square fluctuation, radius of gyration, and total energy; which depicts the structural stability of PTEN protein. Furthermore, mutant PTEN protein structures also showed a significant variation in the solvent accessible surface area and hydrogen bond frequencies from the native PTEN structure. In conclusion, results of this study have established the deleterious effect of the all the five predicted nsSNPs on the PTEN protein structure. Thus, results of the current study can pave a new platform to sort out nsSNPs that can be undertaken for the confirmation of their phenotype and their correlation with diseased status in case of control studies.",3
"Mutations in the PDS gene in German families with Pendred's syndrome: V138F is a founder mutation. || Adolescent Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence Carrier Proteins Child Child, Preschool Female Founder Effect Germany Haplotypes Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Hypothyroidism Infant, Newborn Male Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation, Missense Pedigree Serine Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Threonine Turkey || Pendred's syndrome, an autosomal-recessive condition characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing loss and goiter, is caused by mutations in the PDS gene. Located on chromosome 7q22-q31, it encodes a chloride-iodide transporter expressed in the thyroid, inner ear, and kidney. We investigated the PDS gene of six affected individuals from four unrelated families with Pendred's syndrome by direct sequencing. PDS mutations were identified in homozygous or compound heterozygous state in all six cases. A homozygous missense mutation leading to the amino acid substitution S133T was detected in a family of Turkish origin. The mutations found in the other affected individuals, who originate from Germany, were V138F/Y530H, V138F/E384G, and V138F/V138F. Because V138F was found in the German patients with Pendred's syndrome on at least one allele, we genotyped five microsatellite markers located in the PDS region. All affected German individuals shared a common haplotype at three microsatellite markers located close to or within the PDS gene. We therefore concluded that V138F is a founder mutation in our cohort of German families with Pendred's syndrome.",2 1 3
"A transforming MET mutation discovered in non-small cell lung cancer using microarray-based resequencing. || Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung Humans Lung Neoplasms Mutation Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Polymerase Chain Reaction Spectrometry, Mass, Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption-Ionization || We have designed resequencing microarrays to test the performance of this platform when interrogating a large number of exons (164 total) from genes associated with cancer. To evaluate false positive and negative rates, dideoxy sequencing was done for 335,420 bases interrogated by the arrays. From the array data, calls could be made for approximately 97.5% of the bases, and false positive rates were very low with only a single mutation reported from the array dataset for which the corresponding dideoxy trace had a clean wildtype sequence. For the nucleotide positions where array calls were made, false negative rates were 1.41% for heterozygous mutations. All the homozygous mutations were detected, but 8.11% were erroneously reported as heterozygous changes from the reference sequence by the array analysis software. In addition, 20 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) samples were analyzed using the arrays, and both somatic and germline mutations were found. The most interesting findings were two MET mutations that have recently been implemented in NSCLC. Large scale MALDI-TOF genotyping indicated that one of these mutations (T1010I) might represent a true cancer-causing genotype, whereas the other (N375S) appears to be a common germline polymorphism.",3
"PKU mutation (D143G) associated with an apparent high residual enzyme activity: expression of a kinetic variant form of phenylalanine hydroxylase in three different systems. ||  || We have used three complementary in vitro systems to express the human phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene at high levels. Recombinant PAH was expressed in Escherichia coli (as a fusion protein), in human kidney cells and in a cell-free in vitro transcription-translation system. These systems were used to characterize a novel kinetic variant form (D143G) of the enzyme. The recombinant D143G mutant enzyme had the same physicochemical properties as the wild-type PAH and was stable when expressed in eukaryotic cells. Enzyme activity studies of the D143G mutant enzyme, produced in the three expression systems, revealed a kinetic variant form with reduced affinity for L-Phe (about 2.4-fold increase in the S0.5 value) as well as reduced affinity for tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) (about 2-fold increase in the apparent Km). At standard assay conditions (1 mM L-Phe, t5 microM BH4) the residual activity of the mutant enzyme was high and variable (52%, 33%, and 102%) when analysed in the three different systems. The high residual activities of the mutant enzyme obtained at these conditions were not in agreement with the classical PKU phenotype found in a patient compound heterozygous for the termination mutation G272X and the novel D143G mutation. However, when the D143G mutant enzyme was assayed at lower concentrations of L-Phe (100-300 microM) and BH4 (10 microM) the residual activities were compatible with severely reduced hydroxylation of L-Phe and the classical PKU phenotype.",3 1 0
"Five novel mutations and two large deletions in a population analysis of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. || Alleles Base Sequence Biopterin Gene Frequency Gene Order Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Hydrogen Bonding Models, Molecular Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Prognosis Protein Conformation Registries Sequence Deletion || Mutational spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency was investigated in 107 families (90% of the Slovene PKU population). The entire coding region of the PAH gene was analyzed with dHPLC to select the samples where subsequently the automated sequencing analysis was performed. MLPA analysis was performed to identify large deletions, which were later confirmed with long-range PCR. Correlations with patients' phenotypes and genotype-based predictions of BH(4)-responsiveness were assessed. Altogether, disease-causing mutations were identified on 209 alleles (detection rate 97.7%). A spectrum of 36 different disease-causing mutations was identified: 20 missense mutations (80% of the alleles), eight splicing mutations (13% of the alleles), one nonsense mutation (0.5% of the alleles), four small deletions with frame shift (6% of the alleles), one small insertion with frame shift (0.5% of the alleles), and two large deletions (2% of the alleles). The most frequent mutation was p.R408W in exon 12, representing 29% of the alleles, which is in concordance with other neighboring and/or Slavic PKU populations. Other common mutations were: p.R158Q, p.A403V, p.P281L and p.E390G, accounting for 9%, 7%, 7% and 7% of the alleles respectively. Five novel mutations were detected: c.43_44insAG, c.56_59+1delACAGG, p.V45A, p.L62P and p.R157S. Large deletion of exon 5 (EX5del955) was found in three patients and a deletion of exon 3 (EX3del4765) in one patient. A spectrum of 64 different genotypes was found, seven of them accounting for over than a third of all families. Among thirteen families with homozygous mutation (13% of the PKU population), 10 had p.R408W, two had p.R158Q and one had p.E390G. Among 107 families, 58 were classified as classic PKU (54.2%), 28 as mild PKU (25.9%) and 21 as MHP (19.6%). Twenty-six different genotypes (40.6%) were predicted to be BH(4)-responsive, represented by 38 different families (35.5%).",3 1
"The impact of antibodies in late-onset Pompe disease: a case series and literature review. || Adult Age of Onset Antibodies Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Middle Aged Retrospective Studies alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II, GSD II) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by a deficiency of acid α-glucosidase (GAA), leading to lysosomal glycogen accumulation in various tissues, most notably cardiac, skeletal and smooth muscle. While both infantile and late-onset patients have benefited greatly from alglucosidase alfa (Myozyme®) enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), a subgroup of patients does not demonstrate as pronounced a response as others. Various factors have been identified which may help predict the response to ERT in infantile Pompe disease patients. High, sustained antibody titers (HSAT) have been correlated with poor response to ERT in infantile Pompe cases. However, the literature on the role of antibodies in the late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) population is limited. Our literature review highlights the need for studies to explore the potential impact of antibodies in LOPD. Further supporting the importance of this issue, our retrospective chart review of sixty LOPD patients revealed that six of these sixty (10%) LOPD patients developed HSAT of ≥1:51,200 on two or more occasions at or beyond 6 months on ERT. Here, we present a series of three of these six LOPD patients for whom detailed antibody data and clinical data were available for greater than 1 year on ERT. These three patients developed HSAT corresponding with clinical decline as demonstrated by pulmonary function, quality of life, and motor function testing, affirming the development of HSAT in a subset of patients with LOPD, and its potentially negative impact on clinical response to ERT. The findings of our study and literature review lead us to conclude that there is a strong indication for systematic studies to accurately delineate the potential impact of antibodies in LOPD.",3 1
"Long-chain L 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency does not appear to be the primary cause of lipid myopathy in patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS). ||  || In order to test the hypothesis that long-chain L 3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency is associated with the lipid myopathy and muscle carnitine deficiency observed in Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS), we studied the enzyme activity in cultured skin fibroblasts from three generations of a family with a clear dominant inheritance of BRRS. Enzyme activities were normal while the germline PTEN missense mutation P246L segregated with BRRS in this family. No PTEN mutations were identified in the original patient with BRRS and LCHAD deficiency. These data suggest that the previously reported case of LCHAD and BRRS either represents the coincidental concurrence of two rare genetic events or that a gene other than PTEN is related to LCHAD and BRRS.",2 3
"Alternative splicing in the alpha-galactosidase A gene: increased exon inclusion results in the Fabry cardiac phenotype. || Alternative Splicing Amino Acid Sequence Animals Base Sequence COS Cells Exons Fabry Disease Heart Diseases Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype RNA, Messenger Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Sequence Alignment alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is an inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism, resulting from deficient activity of lysosomal alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A). A rare alternative splicing that introduces a 57-nucleotide (nt) intronic sequence to the alpha-Gal A transcript from intron 4 of the gene has been identified. In addition, a novel midintronic base substitution that results in substantially increased alternative splicing has been identified in a patient with Fabry disease who has the cardiac variant phenotype. The sequence of the patient's intron 4 contains a single G-->A transversion at genomic nt 9331 (IVS4+919 G-->A ), located at the minus sign4 position of the 3' end of the intronic insertion (nts 9278--9334 in the genomic sequence). Minigene constructs containing the entire intron 4 sequence with G, A, C, or T at nt 9331 within an alpha-Gal A complementary DNA expression vector were prepared and expressed in COS-1 cells. Whereas transfection of the G or T minigenes transcribed predominantly normal-sized transcripts, the transfection of the A or C minigenes produced a large amount of the alternatively spliced transcript. These results suggest that the G-->A mutation, within an A/C-rich domain, results in increased recognition of the alternative splicing by an A/C-rich enhancer-type exonic splicing enhancer. The intronic mutation was not observed in 100 unrelated unaffected men but was present in 6 unrelated patients with cardiac Fabry disease. Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction of total RNA of various normal human tissues revealed that the alternatively spliced transcript was present in all of the samples, and especially at a higher ratio in the lung and muscle. The normal transcript was present in the patients' lymphoblasts and resulted in approximately 10% residual enzyme activity, leading to a cardiac phenotype of Fabry disease.",3 4 0
"Variants of uncertain significance in newborn screening disorders: implications for large-scale genomic sequencing. || Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Galactosemias Genetic Variation Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Mutation Neonatal Screening Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias UTP-Hexose-1-Phosphate Uridylyltransferase || As exome and genome sequencing using high-throughput sequencing technologies move rapidly into the diagnostic process, laboratories and clinicians need to develop a strategy for dealing with uncertain findings. A commitment must be made to minimize these findings, and all parties may need to make adjustments to their processes. The information required to reclassify these variants is often available but not communicated to all relevant parties. To illustrate these issues, we focused on three well-characterized monogenic, metabolic disorders included in newborn screens: classic galactosemia, caused by GALT variants; phenylketonuria, caused by PAH variants; and medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency, caused by ACADM variants. In 10 years of clinical molecular testing, we have observed 134 unique GALT variants, 46 of which were variants of uncertain significance (VUS). In PAH, we observed 132 variants, including 17 VUS, and for ACADM, we observed 64 unique variants, of which 33 were uncertain. After this review, 17 VUS (37%; 7 in ACADM, 9 in GALT, and 1 in PAH) were reclassified from uncertain (6 to benign or likely benign and 11 to pathogenic or likely pathogenic). We identified common types of missing information that would have helped make a definitive classification and categorized this information by ease and cost to obtain.Genet Med 19 1, 77-82.",3
"Frequency of Fabry disease in male and female haemodialysis patients in Spain. || Adult Aged, 80 and over Alleles Amino Acid Substitution Fabry Disease Female Genotype Heterozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Renal Dialysis Spain alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD), an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder, is caused by a reduced activity of the lysosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A. The disorder ultimately leads to organ damage (including renal failure) in males and females. However, heterozygous females usually present a milder phenotype with a later onset and a slower progression. A combined enzymatic and genetic strategy was used, measuring the activity of alpha-galactosidase A and genotyping the alpha-galactosidase A gene (GLA) in dried blood samples (DBS) of 911 patients undergoing haemodialysis in centers across Spain. GLA alterations were found in seven unrelated patients (4 males and 3 females). Two novel mutations (p.Gly346AlafsX347 and p.Val199GlyfsX203) were identified as well as a previously described mutation, R118C. The R118C mutation was present in 60% of unrelated patients with GLA causal mutations. The D313Y alteration, considered by some authors as a pseudo-deficiency allele, was also found in two out of seven patients. Excluding the controversial D313Y alteration, FD presents a frequency of one in 182 individuals (0.55%) within this population of males and females undergoing haemodialysis. Moreover, our findings suggest that a number of patients with unexplained and atypical symptoms of renal disease may have FD. Screening programmes for FD in populations of individuals presenting severe kidney dysfunction, cardiac alterations or cerebrovascular disease may lead to the diagnosis of FD in those patients, the study of their families and eventually the implementation of a specific therapy.",3 0
Phenylketonuria in Spanish Gypsies: prevalence of the IVS10nt546 mutation on haplotype 34. ||  || ,3 1
"CpG dinucleotides are mutation hot spots in phenylketonuria. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Dinucleoside Phosphates Exons Haplotypes Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length || The coding region of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene contains 22 CpG dinucleotides, including five doublets in the seventh exon of the gene. We hypothesized that CpG doublets could represent mutation hot spots in PAH deficiencies and we carried out the systematic sequence analysis of exon 7 in 20 unrelated PAH-deficient kindreds of Mediterranean ancestry. This procedure resulted in the detection of two novel missense mutations whose location and nature (CG to CA and CG to TG) were consistent with the accidental deamination of a 5-methylcytosine in a CpG doublet (codon 261arg----gln and codon 252arg----trp). Moreover, the codon 261 mutation was found to be associated with mutant restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) haplotype 1, the most frequent mutant RFLP haplotype at the PAH locus in the studies reported thus far. However, since the mutation was detected in only 36% of haplotype 1 mutant alleles, it appears that this haplotype at the PAH locus is genotypically heterogeneous in Mediterranean countries.",3
"Comprehensive Rare Variant Analysis via Whole-Genome Sequencing to Determine the Molecular Pathology of Inherited Retinal Disease. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Alleles Base Sequence Choroideremia DNA Mutational Analysis Ethnic Groups Exome Female Genes, Recessive Genetic Variation Genome, Human Humans Introns Male Mutation Rare Diseases Retinal Diseases || Inherited retinal disease is a common cause of visual impairment and represents a highly heterogeneous group of conditions. Here, we present findings from a cohort of 722 individuals with inherited retinal disease, who have had whole-genome sequencing (n = 605), whole-exome sequencing (n = 72), or both (n = 45) performed, as part of the NIHR-BioResource Rare Diseases research study. We identified pathogenic variants (single-nucleotide variants, indels, or structural variants) for 404/722 (56%) individuals. Whole-genome sequencing gives unprecedented power to detect three categories of pathogenic variants in particular: structural variants, variants in GC-rich regions, which have significantly improved coverage compared to whole-exome sequencing, and variants in non-coding regulatory regions. In addition to previously reported pathogenic regulatory variants, we have identified a previously unreported pathogenic intronic variant in CHM in two males with choroideremia. We have also identified 19 genes not previously known to be associated with inherited retinal disease, which harbor biallelic predicted protein-truncating variants in unsolved cases. Whole-genome sequencing is an increasingly important comprehensive method with which to investigate the genetic causes of inherited retinal disease.",3 1 4
"[Mutation analysis of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in patients w ith phenylketonuria in Henan province]. ||  || To study the characteristics of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) mutations in patients with phenylketonuria (PKU) in Henan province, in order to provide basic information for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis. Mutations of the PAH gene were detected in exons 1-13 with flanking introns of PAH gene by PCR and DNA sequencing in 47 families with PKU. A total of 25 different mutations were detected in 83 out of 94 PAH alleles (88.3%). Among them, E79fX13, H271R and D415Y have not been reported previously. It was the first time that IVS10-14C to G mutation was reported in Chinese PKU population. The mutations p.R243Q, EX6-96A to G, p.Y356X, IVS401G to A, p.R111X, p.V399V and p.R413P, were the prevalent mutations with relative frequencies of 20.5%, 12.0%, 9.6%, 9.6%, 8.4%, 8.4% and 7.2% respectively. The mutations of the PAH gene in patients with classical phenylketonuria in Henan province were similar to that in other areas of China. Prenatal gene diagnosis for PKU by PAH gene sequencing is efficient for most PKU families.",3
"Analysis of the genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with phenylketonuria in mainland China. ||  || Mutations in the gene encoding phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) are associated with various degrees of phenylketonuria (PKU). The aim of our study was to define the genotype-phenotype correlations of mutations in the PAH gene that cause phenylketonuria (PKU) among the Chinese mainland population. Mutations in the PAH gene were analysed by next-generation sequencing, and a genotype-phenotype correlation analysis was performed in 1079 patients. Fifteen ""null + null"" genotypes, including four homoallelic and eleven heteroallelic genotypes, were clearly associated with classic PKU. Five functionally hemizygous (p.E280K, p.R252Q, p.E56D, p.S310F and p.T372R) and four compound heterozygous (p.T278I/p.S359L, p.R408W/p.R243Q, p.F161S/p.R243Q and p.F161S/p.R413P) genotypes were clearly associated with classic PKU. Ten functionally hemizygous genotypes, p.G257V, p.R158W, p.L255S, p.G247V, p.F161S, p.R158Q, p.V388M, p.I65T, p.I324N and p.R400K, were frequently associated with classic PKU. Three functionally hemizygous genotypes, p.P147L, p.I95del and p.F331S, and four compound heterozygous genotypes, p.G257V/p.R408Q, p.A434D/p.R413P, p.R243Q/p.A47E and p.R241C/p.G239D, were consistently correlated with mild PKU. Three functionally hemizygous genotypes, p.H107R, p.Q419R and p.F392I, and nine compound heterozygous genotypes (p.G312V/p.R241C, p.R243Q/p.V230I, p.R243Q/p.A403V, p.R243Q/p.Q419R, p.R243Q/p.R53H, p.R243Q/p.H107R, p.R241C/p.R408Q, p.R241C/p.H220P and p.R53H/p.R400K) were consistent with mild hyperphenylalaninaemia (MHP). Our study provides further support for the hypothesis that the PAH genotype is the main factor that determines the phenotype of PKU.",3 1
"Identification of seven novel germline mutations in the human E-cadherin (CDH1) gene. ||  || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is a cancer predisposition syndrome caused by germline mutation of the gene encoding the tumour-suppressor E-cadherin (CDH1). We describe the search for CDH1 mutations in 36 new diffuse gastric cancer families. All 16 CDH1 exons, neighbouring intronic sequence and an essential promoter region were screened by DNA sequencing. We detected nine different mutations, seven of which were novel. Of the seven novel mutations, five were identified in families who met the IGCLC clinical criteria for HDGC. Two mutations resulted in a premature stop codon and truncation of the protein. Three mutations affected splice sites; two of the splice-site mutations were shown by RT-PCR to disturb normal CDH1 splicing, while the third splice-site mutation was present in two unrelated HDGC families. The remaining two mutations resulted in amino acid substitutions and impaired the ability of E-cadherin protein to form cellular aggregates and suppress invasion in vitro. Together with the occurrence of extra-gastric tumours such as lobular breast and colorectal cancer, these findings further extend the types of CDH1 mutations and the spectrum of tumours associated with HDGC.",2 4 0 3
"Cowden syndrome and Lhermitte-Duclos disease in a family: a single genetic syndrome with pleiotropy? || Adult Breast Neoplasms Cerebellar Diseases Cerebellum Child Female Fibroadenoma Genes, Dominant Genes, p53 Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Hypertrophy Male Pedigree Polymorphism, Genetic Syndrome || Cowden syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition of multiple hamartomas. Patients with this phakomatosis have an increased risk of breast cancer and thyroid tumours. Lhermitte-Duclos disease is usually a sporadic condition of cerebellar ganglion cell hypertrophy, ataxia, mental retardation, and self-limited seizure disorder. We describe a three generation family with Cowden syndrome and Lhermitte-Duclos disease. Karyotyping performed on the peripheral lymphocytes of the proband and her affected mother showed a 46,XX complement. Single strand conformational polymorphism analysis failed to show any germline p53 mutations as a cause of the syndrome in this family.",3
"Evaluation of neonatal BH4 loading test in neonates screened for hyperphenylalaninemia. || Biopterin Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Mass Screening Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || The outcome in phenylketonuria is related to the early diagnosis and management due to neonatal screening. To assess the interest of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) loading test and phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotyping in the management of neonates with hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA). We evaluate the effectiveness of a BH4 loading test (20 mg/kg) in ten neonates screened for HPA. We evaluated the time required to reach a target plasma Phenylalanine (Phe) level below 300 micromol/l. We compared these ten BH4-loaded patients to the 10 previous neonates non-loaded with BH4. In all these patients, the PAH genotype was determined. One loaded patient had biopterin synthesis deficiency and has been retrieved from statistical analysis. All others patients have PAH deficiency. Between the BH4 loaded group (L) and the BH4 non-loaded group (NL), a statistically significant difference was observed in the average time required to reached the target Phe level (13.56 +/- 4.30 (L) vs. 20.6 +/- 7.59 days (NL) [p < 0.02]). Results of the genotyping from all but one of these 19 patients indicated that among all mutations present in this patient population, there were 4 known PAH mutations associated with BH4 responsiveness (p.R261Q, the p.V388 M, the p.E390G and the p.Y414C). These mutations were found in 4 non-loaded and 6 loaded patients. Two patients had a more than 90% reduction in their plasma Phe level within 24 h after the load. One of these patients had a PTPS deficiency. The other fully responsive patient (p.Y414C and IVS10-11G>A) has been treated with BH4 from birth with an excellent metabolic control for three years now. BH4 loading test improves the management of HPA. It allows an immediate identification of the children fully responsive to BH4. Our results therefore suggest the incorporation of BH4 loading test in the management of neonates screened for HPA.",3 1
"Long-term treatment and diagnosis of tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive hyperphenylalaninemia with a mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. || Biopterin Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || A novel therapeutic strategy for phenylketonuria (PKU) has been initiated in Japan. A total of 12 patients who met the criteria for tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4))-responsive hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) with a mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) (EC 1.14.16.1) gene were recruited at 12 medical centers in Japan between June 1995 and July 2001. Therapeutic efficacy of BH(4) was evaluated in single-dose, four-dose, and 1-wk BH(4) loading tests followed by long-term BH(4) treatment, and also examined in relation to the PAH gene mutations. The endpoints were determined as the percentage decline in serum phenylalanine from initial values after single-dose (>20%), four-dose (>30%), and 1-wk BH(4) (>50%) loading tests. Patients with mild PKU exhibiting decreases in blood phenylalanine concentrations of >20% in the single-dose test also demonstrated decreases of >30% in the four-dose test. The 1-wk test elicited BH(4) responsiveness even in patients with poor responses in the shorter tests. Patients with mild HPA, many of whom carry the R241C allele, responded to BH(4) administration. No clear correlation was noted between the degree of decrease in serum phenylalanine concentrations in the single- or four-dose tests and specific PAH mutations. The 1-wk test (20 mg/kg of BH(4) per day) is the most sensitive test for the diagnosis of BH(4)-responsive PAH deficiency. Responsiveness apparently depends on mutations in the PAH gene causing mild PKU, such as R241C. BH(4) proved to be an effective therapy that may be able to replace or liberalize the phenylalanine-restricted diets for a considerable number of patients with mild PKU.",3 1 0
Germline TP53 mutations result into a constitutive defect of p53 DNA binding and transcriptional response to DNA damage. ||  || ,3
"Early onset HER2-positive breast cancer is associated with germline TP53 mutations. || Adult Aged Aging Biomarkers, Tumor Breast Neoplasms Case-Control Studies Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Humans Middle Aged Receptor, ErbB-2 Receptors, Estrogen Receptors, Progesterone Retrospective Studies Signal Transduction Time Factors Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Germline TP53 mutations predispose to early onset breast cancer in women and are associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Published data on the pathological characteristics of breast cancer among women with TP53 mutations is limited. We retrospectively reviewed the clinical records of women who underwent genetic testing for suspected germline TP53 mutations and who were diagnosed with breast cancer between 2000 and 2011. The pathological characteristics of the breast tumors from patients testing positive for a mutation (cases) were compared with those testing negative (controls). Patients who tested positive for germlineTP53 mutations (n = 30) were compared with controls (n = 79). Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) amplification and/or overexpression was found in 67% of the tumors from the cases, compared with 25% for the controls (P = .0001). Among patients with a mutation, 70% had estrogen receptor- and/or progesterone receptor-positive tumors, compared with 68% in the control group (P = .87). After adjusting for age at breast cancer diagnosis, having a HER2-positive tumor increased the odds of testing positive for a germline TP53 mutation (odds ratio, 6.9; 95% confidence interval, 2.6-18.2). For each yearly increment in age at breast cancer diagnosis, there was decreased likelihood of having a TP53 mutation of 5% (odds ratio, 0.95; 95% confidence interval0.91-0.99). This study suggests an association between germline TP53 mutations and early onset HER2-positive breast cancer. If confirmed in a larger cohort, these results could guide genetic testing strategies, lead to chemoprevention trials incorporating HER2-targeted therapies, and elucidate some of the molecular pathways involved in breast cancer.",3
"Measurement of urinary CDH and CTH by tandem mass spectrometry in patients hemizygous and heterozygous for Fabry disease. ||  || Fabry disease is an X-linked disorder of glycosphingolipid metabolism resulting from a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A. This deficiency leads to the progressive accumulation, in lysosomes of visceral tissues and in body fluids of hemizygotes, of the glycosphingolipids globotriaosylceramide (CTH, Gb(3) or GL-3) and galabiosylceramide (CDH) and to a lesser extent the blood group AB and B related glycolipids. Elevated levels of the glycosphingolipids are found in the urine of hemizygous males with the classic phenotype, but it is not known whether all symptomatic or asymptomatic heterozygotes have elevated levels. We have therefore measured CTH and CDH quantitatively in a multiplex assay using tandem mass spectrometry in urine from a large cohort (44) of genetically proven or obligate heterozygotes including four with the N215S mutation, from classic hemizygotes (28), from cardiac variant hemizygotes with the N215S mutation (6) and from normal controls. The levels of CTH and CDH were related to both creatinine and sphingomyelin. Urinary CTH was elevated in all 28 classic hemizygotes but only in 4/6 of the cardiac variants. The level was within or just above the normal reference range in the four individuals heterozygous for the N215S mutation but was elevated in 38/40 of the other heterozygotes. Similar results were obtained for CDH, except that only 34/40 heterozygotes had an elevated level. The level of CDH was not elevated in the four heterozygotes and 4/6 of the hemizygotes for the N215S mutation. Combining the levels of CTH and CDH did not improve the discrimination of heterozygotes from controls. The ratio of CDH to CTH was higher in heterozygotes than in hemizygotes. Measurement of urinary CTH gave the best discrimination of heterozygotes from controls.",3 0
"The alpha-galactosidase A p.Arg118Cys variant does not cause a Fabry disease phenotype: data from individual patients and family studies. || Adult Alleles Amino Acid Substitution Codon Fabry Disease Family Health Female Gene Frequency Genotype Humans Kidney Male Middle Aged Molecular Structure Mutation Phenotype alpha-Galactosidase || Lysosomal α-galactosidase A (α-Gal) is the enzyme deficient in Fabry disease (FD), an X-linked glycosphingolipidosis caused by pathogenic mutations affecting the GLA gene. The early-onset, multi-systemic FD classical phenotype is associated with absent or severe enzyme deficiency, as measured by in vitro assays, but patients with higher levels of residual α-Gal activity may have later-onset, more organ-restricted clinical presentations. A change in the codon 118 of the wild-type α-Gal sequence, replacing basic arginine by a potentially sulfhydryl-binding cysteine residue - GLA p.(Arg118Cys) -, has been recurrently described in large FD screening studies of high-risk patients. Although the Cys118 allele is associated with high residual α-Gal activity in vitro, it has been classified as a pathogenic mutation, mainly on the basis of theoretical arguments about the chemistry of the cysteine residue. However its pathogenicity has never been convincingly demonstrated by pathology criteria. We reviewed the clinical, biochemical and histopathology data obtained from 22 individuals of Portuguese and Spanish ancestry carrying the Cys118 allele, including 3 homozygous females. Cases were identified either on the differential diagnosis of possible FD manifestations and on case-finding studies (n=11; 4 males), or on unbiased cascade screening of probands' close relatives (n=11; 3 males). Overall, those data strongly suggest that the GLA p.(Arg118Cys) variant does not segregate with FD clinical phenotypes in a Mendelian fashion, but might be a modulator of the multifactorial risk of cerebrovascular disease. The Cys118 allelic frequency in healthy Portuguese adults (n=696) has been estimated as 0.001, therefore not qualifying for ""rare"" condition.",2 0 3
"Paternal origin of FGFR3 mutations in Muenke-type craniosynostosis. || Adult Age Factors Amino Acid Substitution Child Craniosynostoses DNA Mutational Analysis Female Humans Male Mutation, Missense Paternal Age Pedigree Polymerase Chain Reaction Protein-Tyrosine Kinases Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3 Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor Risk Factors Syndrome || Muenke syndrome, also known as FGFR3-associated coronal synostosis, is defined molecularly by the presence of a heterozygous nucleotide transversion, c.749C>G, encoding the amino acid substitution Pro250Arg, in the fibroblast growth factor receptor type 3 gene (FGFR3). This frequently occurs as a new mutation, manifesting one of the highest documented rates for any transversion in the human genome. To understand the biology of this mutation, we have investigated its parental origin, and the ages of the parents, in 19 families with de novo c.749C>G mutations. All ten informative cases originated from the paternal allele (95% confidence interval 74-100% paternal); the average paternal age at birth overall was 34.7 years. An exclusive paternal origin of mutations, and increased paternal age, were previously described for a different mutation (c.1138G>A) of the FGFR3 gene causing achondroplasia, as well as for mutations of the related FGFR2 gene causing Apert, Crouzon and Pfeiffer syndromes. We conclude that similar biological processes are likely to shape the occurrence of this c.749C>G mutation as for other mutations of FGFR3 as well as FGFR2.",3
"Cross-reactive immunologic material status affects treatment outcomes in Pompe disease infants. || Cross Reactions Enzyme Replacement Therapy Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunoglobulin G Infant Male Muscle Strength Recombinant Proteins Retrospective Studies Treatment Outcome alpha-Galactosidase || Deficiency of acid alpha glucosidase (GAA) causes Pompe disease, which is usually fatal if onset occurs in infancy. Patients synthesize a non-functional form of GAA or are unable to form native enzyme. Enzyme replacement therapy with recombinant human GAA (rhGAA) prolongs survival in infantile Pompe patients but may be less effective in cross-reactive immunologic material (CRIM)-negative patients. We retrospectively analyzed the influence of CRIM status on outcome in 21 CRIM-positive and 11 CRIM-negative infantile Pompe patients receiving rhGAA. Patients were from the clinical setting and from clinical trials of rhGAA, were 6 months of age, were not invasively ventilated, and were treated with IV rhGAA at a cumulative or total dose of 20 or 40 mg/kg/2 weeks. Outcome measures included survival, invasive ventilator-free survival, cardiac status, gross motor development, development of antibodies to rhGAA, and levels of urinary Glc(4). Following 52 weeks of treatment, 6/11 (54.5%) CRIM-negative and 1/21 (4.8%) CRIM-positive patients were deceased or invasively ventilated (p<0.0001). By age 27.1 months, all CRIM-negative patients and 4/21 (19.0%) CRIM-positive patients were deceased or invasively ventilated. Cardiac function and gross motor development improved significantly more in the CRIM-positive group. IgG antibodies to rhGAA developed earlier and serotiters were higher and more sustained in the CRIM-negative group. CRIM-negative status predicted reduced overall survival and invasive ventilator-free survival and poorer clinical outcomes in infants with Pompe disease treated with rhGAA. The effect of CRIM status on outcome appears to be mediated by antibody responses to the exogenous protein.",3 1 4
"Mutation analysis in patients with the typical form of Anderson-Fabry disease. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Fabry Disease Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Polymorphism, Genetic X Chromosome alpha-Galactosidase || ",3
"Mutations in the regulatory domain of phenylalanine hydroxylase and response to tetrahydrobiopterin. || Adolescent Adult Amino Acid Substitution Biopterin Child DNA Mutational Analysis Humans Middle Aged Models, Molecular Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Protein Conformation Regulatory Sequences, Nucleic Acid Sequence Deletion || Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) is a co-factor that enhances the activity of other enzymes, and this co-factor level is found to be affected in phenylketonuria (PKU), an amino acid metabolism disorder. The present study was aimed at understanding the effect of BH4 on mutations in the regulatory domain of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). Among 14 patients, 5 patients were classical PKU, 3 were atypical PKU, and 6 were mild PKU. All of these patients had at least one mutation in the regulatory domain. Patients were given 10 mg/kg BH4, and the response of blood phenylalanine (Phe) levels was monitored following treatment. The level of blood Phe decreased after BH4 treatment in all of the patients. These studies suggest that mutations in the regulatory domain also responded to BH4 even if the patient had classical PKU.",3
Clinical heterogeneity in a family with mutations in USH2A. ||  || ,2 3
"Successful immune tolerance induction to enzyme replacement therapy in CRIM-negative infantile Pompe disease. || Antibodies B-Lymphocytes Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immune Tolerance Infant Infant, Newborn Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Neuroimaging Oligosaccharides Recombinant Proteins Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || Infantile Pompe disease resulting from a deficiency of lysosomal acid α-glucosidase (GAA) requires enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with recombinant human GAA (rhGAA). Cross-reactive immunologic material negative (CRIM-negative) Pompe patients develop high-titer antibody to the rhGAA and do poorly. We describe successful tolerance induction in CRIM-negative patients. Two CRIM-negative patients with preexisting anti-GAA antibodies were treated therapeutically with rituximab, methotrexate, and gammaglobulins. Two additional CRIM-negative patients were treated prophylactically with a short course of rituximab and methotrexate, in parallel with initiating rhGAA. In both patients treated therapeutically, anti-rhGAA was eliminated after 3 and 19 months. All four patients are immune tolerant to rhGAA, off immune therapy, showing B-cell recovery while continuing to receive ERT at ages 36 and 56 months (therapeutic) and 18 and 35 months (prophylactic). All patients show clinical response to ERT, in stark contrast to the rapid deterioration of their nontolerized CRIM-negative counterparts. The combination of rituximab with methotrexate ± intravenous gammaglobulins (IVIG) is an option for tolerance induction of CRIM-negative Pompe to ERT when instituted in the naïve setting or following antibody development. It should be considered in other conditions in which antibody response to the therapeutic protein elicits robust antibody response that interferes with product efficacy.",3 1
"Comprehensive sequence analysis of nine Usher syndrome genes in the UK National Collaborative Usher Study. || Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Multifactorial Inheritance Mutation Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide United Kingdom Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome (USH) is an autosomal recessive disorder comprising retinitis pigmentosa, hearing loss and, in some cases, vestibular dysfunction. It is clinically and genetically heterogeneous with three distinctive clinical types (I-III) and nine Usher genes identified. This study is a comprehensive clinical and genetic analysis of 172 Usher patients and evaluates the contribution of digenic inheritance. The genes MYO7A, USH1C, CDH23, PCDH15, USH1G, USH2A, GPR98, WHRN, CLRN1 and the candidate gene SLC4A7 were sequenced in 172 UK Usher patients, regardless of clinical type. No subject had definite mutations (nonsense, frameshift or consensus splice site mutations) in two different USH genes. Novel missense variants were classified UV1-4 (unclassified variant): UV4 is 'probably pathogenic', based on control frequency <0.23%, identification in trans to a pathogenic/probably pathogenic mutation and segregation with USH in only one family; and UV3 ('likely pathogenic') as above, but no information on phase. Overall 79% of identified pathogenic/UV4/UV3 variants were truncating and 21% were missense changes. MYO7A accounted for 53.2%, and USH1C for 14.9% of USH1 families (USH1C:c.496+1G>A being the most common USH1 mutation in the cohort). USH2A was responsible for 79.3% of USH2 families and GPR98 for only 6.6%. No mutations were found in USH1G, WHRN or SLC4A7. One or two pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were identified in 86% of cases. No convincing cases of digenic inheritance were found. It is concluded that digenic inheritance does not make a significant contribution to Usher syndrome; the observation of multiple variants in different genes is likely to reflect polymorphic variation, rather than digenic effects.",2 1 3
"Mutations Ivs4nt1, 47delCT, and G148S identified in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene by RT-PCR of illegitimate transcripts and chemical cleavage of mismatch. ||  || ",3 1 0
"PTEN: one gene, many syndromes. ||  || PTEN, on 10q23.3, encodes a major lipid phosphatase which signals down the phosphoinositol-3-kinase/Akt pathway and effects G1 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Germline PTEN mutations have been found to occur in 80% of classic Cowden syndrome (CS), 60% of Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS), up to 20% of Proteus syndrome (PS), and approximately 50% of a Proteus-like syndrome (PSL). CS is a heritable multiple hamartoma syndrome with a high risk of breast, thyroid, and endometrial carcinomas. BRRS is a congenital autosomal dominant disorder characterized by megencephaly, developmental delay, lipomatosis, and speckled penis. PS and PSL had never been associated with risk of malignancy. Finding germline PTEN mutations in patients with BRRS, PS, and PSL suggests equivalent risks of developing malignancy as in CS with implications for medical management. The mutational spectra of CS and BRRS overlap, with many of the mutations occurring in exons 5, 7, and 8. Genotype-phenotype association analyses have revealed that the presence of germline PTEN mutations is associated with breast tumor development, and that mutations occurring within and 5' of the phosphatase motif were associated with multi-organ involvement. Pooled analysis of PTEN mutation series of CS and BRRS occurring in the last five years reveals that 65% of CS-associated mutations occur in the first five exons encoding the phosphatase domain and the promoter region, while 60% of BRRS-associated mutations occur in the 3' four exons encoding mainly the C2 domain. Somatic PTEN mutations occur with a wide distribution of frequencies in sporadic primary tumors, with the highest frequencies in endometrial carcinomas and glioblastoma multiform. Several mechanisms of PTEN inactivation occur in primary malignancies derived from different tissues, but a favored mechanism appears to occur in a tissue-specific manner. Inappropriate subcellular compartmentalization and increased/decreased proteosome degradation may be two novel mechanisms of PTEN inactivation. Further functional work could reveal more effective means of molecular-directed therapy and prevention.",3
"Ten-year outcome of enzyme replacement therapy with agalsidase beta in patients with Fabry disease. || Adolescent Adult Enzyme Replacement Therapy Fabry Disease Female Follow-Up Studies Humans Isoenzymes Kidney Diseases Male Middle Aged Recombinant Proteins Treatment Outcome Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease results from deficient α-galactosidase A activity and globotriaosylceramide accumulation causing renal insufficiency, strokes, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and early demise. We assessed the 10-year outcome of recombinant α-galactosidase A therapy. The outcomes (severe clinical events, renal function, cardiac structure) of 52/58 patients with classic Fabry disease from the phase 3 clinical trial and extension study, and the Fabry Registry were evaluated. Disease progression rates for patients with low renal involvement (LRI, n=32) or high renal involvement (HRI, n=20) at baseline were assessed. 81% of patients (42/52) did not experience any severe clinical event during the treatment interval and 94% (49/52) were alive at the end of the study period. Ten patients reported a total of 16 events. Patients classified as LRI started therapy 13 years younger than HRI (mean 25 years vs 38 years). Mean slopes for estimated glomerular filtration rate for LRI and HRI were -1.89 mL/min/1.73 m(2)/year and -6.82 mL/min/1.73 m(2)/year, respectively. Overall, the mean left ventricular posterior wall thickness and interventricular septum thickness remained unchanged and normal. Patients who initiated treatment at age ≥ 40 years exhibited significant increase in left ventricular posterior wall thickness and interventricular septum thickness. Mean plasma globotriaosylceramide normalised within 6 months. This 10-year study documents the effectiveness of agalsidase beta (1 mg/kg/2 weeks) in patients with Fabry disease. Most patients remained alive and event-free. Patients who initiated treatment at a younger age and with less kidney involvement benefited the most from therapy. Patients who initiated treatment at older ages and/or had advanced renal disease experienced disease progression.",3 4
"Analysis of exon 7 of the human phenylalanine hydroxylase gene: a mutation hot spot? ||  || Complete sequence analysis of 194 human phenylalanine hydroxylase genes from PKU patients originating from West Germany and Bulgaria revealed 13 different mutations within exon 7 of the gene. Four of these mutations (T238P: ACT-->CCT; L242F:CTC-->TTC; R252G:CGG-->GGG; and 1043 delta 11: nt 1043-nt 1053 deleted) have so far not been described in the literature. Including these new mutations at least 21 different gene lesions and one sequence polymorphism exist for exon 7. Despite this large number unbiased calculation of the mutation frequency/exon size ratio does not provide conclusive evidence that exon 7 is a hot spot for disease causing mutations. Extensive screening during our experiments also failed to demonstrate the existence of excessive polymorphism in this part of the gene. It might therefore be speculated that the functional importance of the highly conserved exon 7 sequence accounts for the clustering of observed mutations which result in clinically manifest PKU. In addition we report our experience in regard to the resolution capacity of denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), a nonradioactive technique for the rapid screening of unknown mutations in exon 7.",3 1
"Observational clinical study in juvenile-adult glycogenosis type 2 patients undergoing enzyme replacement therapy for up to 4 years. || Adolescent Adult Aged Body Mass Index Child Cohort Studies Echocardiography Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Heart Rate Humans Italy Male Middle Aged Observation Physical Examination Respiration Severity of Illness Index Statistics, Nonparametric Time Factors Treatment Outcome Vital Capacity Walking Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || The objective of this study was to describe a large Italian cohort of patients with late-onset glycogen storage disease type 2 (GSDII) at various stages of disease progression and to evaluate the clinical effectiveness of alglucosidase alpha enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). Previous studies showed in late-onset patients ERT efficacy against placebo and variable response in uncontrolled studies. Seventy-four juvenile or adult GSDII patients were treated with ERT in a multicenter open label, non-randomized study, from 12 months up to 54 months. Recombinant human alpha glucosidase (rh-GAA) was injected by intravenous route at 20 mg/kg every second week. Patients were divided into three groups according to ERT duration: Group A received treatment for 12-23 months (n = 16), Group B for 24-35 months (n = 14), and Group C for more than 36 months (n = 44). Clinical assessment included a 6-min walk test (6MWT), forced vital capacity (FVC), the Walton and Gardner-Medwin score, the number of hours of ventilation, body mass index, echocardiography and blood creatine kinase (CK). Included in our cohort were 33 males and 41 females (M:F = 0.8:1), with a mean age at first symptoms of 28.3 years (range 2-55 years) and a mean age of 43 years at study entry (range 7-72 years). Seven wheelchair bound patients, as well as 27 patients requiring ventilation support, were included. After treatment we could observe an increase in distance walked on the 6MWT in the large majority of patients (48/58; 83%), with an overall mean increase of 63 m (from 320 ± 161 to 383 ± 178 m). After treatment in the majority of patients FVC was improved or unchanged (45/69; 65%). In ventilated patients we observed an improvement in average number of hours off the ventilator (from 15.6 to 12.1 h). Six patients stopped mechanical ventilation and two others started it. The effect of therapy was not related to ERT duration. Nine of 64 patients (13%) that underwent to echocardiography showed a variable degree of cardiac hypertrophy (left ventriculum or septum), and a positive effect was observed after 36 months of ERT in one adult case. Discontinuation of treatment occurred in four patients: one drop-off case, one patient died for a sepsis after 34 months of treatment and two patients stopped ERT for worsening of general clinical condition. Mild adverse effects were observed in four cases (5%). This study represents the largest cohort of late-onset GSDII patients treated with ERT, and confirm a positive effect of treatment. These results, obtained in a large case series on therapy, indicate a favourable effect of ERT therapy, even in more advanced stage of the disease.",3 1
"Pregnancy in homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia--Importance of LDL-apheresis. || Biomarkers Blood Component Removal Cholesterol, LDL DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Homozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Immunosorbent Techniques Live Birth Mutation Phenotype Pregnancy Pregnancy Complications Receptors, LDL Severity of Illness Index Time Factors Treatment Outcome || Rare cases of pregnancy in women with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HFH) have been reported. HFH might pose significant risks for the mother and her fetus. Statins, the most potent agents for low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol reduction, are contraindicated; thus lipoprotein apheresis remains the only effective treatment. We report on a 34-year-old pregnant woman with HFH who was treated throughout the entire pregnancy by lipoprotein apheresis (immunoadsorption method). Increasing levels of LDL-cholesterol were stabilized at 9-10 mmol/L by lipoprotein apheresis (performed every 10 days). No complications were observed during the treatment procedures. Monitoring of the fetus revealed no impairment of the umbilical cord and blood flow in the uterine arteries, as well as no intrauterine growth retardation. The delivery was spontaneous and the child was breastfed for two months. Intensive treatment by lipoprotein apheresis is an effective and safe therapeutic strategy during pregnancy, even in severe cases of HFH, as it can stabilize progressively increasing lipoprotein levels and prevent severe complications.",3 4
"Phenotype and biochemical heterogeneity in late onset Fabry disease defined by N215S mutation. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Aged, 80 and over Carboxymethylcellulose Sodium Fabry Disease Female Genetic Association Studies Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Retrospective Studies Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) results from X-linked inheritance of a mutation in the GLA gene, encoding for alpha galactosidase A, and is characterized by heterogeneous clinical manifestations. Two phenotypes have been described ""Classic"" and ""late onset"" which cannot be predicted exclusively by genotype. The latter has been considered an attenuated form of the disease often affecting a single organ system commonly the heart. Recent studies have demonstrated that cardiac outcomes are similar in patients with classic and late onset mutations. In this study we investigate the relationship between clinical heterogeneity and plasma lyso-Gb3 in a large single centre cohort of N215S patients and compare this to patients with other mutations. In this single-centre, retrospective, cross-sectional study we analysed a cohort of 251 FD patients: 84 N215S mutation (37 males) and 167 non-N215S mutations (58 males). The Mainz severity score index (MSSI) was used as an index of overall disease severity. Cardiac function and morphology were assessed by electrocardiogram and echocardiogram. Left ventricular mass was calculated using the Devereux formula and the left ventricular mass index (LVMI) calculated to adjust for height (g/m2.7). The presence of white matter lesions was assessed by cerebral MRI or computed tomography (CT). GFR was measured by radio-isotope (chromium-EDTA) method and adjusted for patient height (ml/min/m2.7), and urinary protein quantification was undertaken by 24 hour urine collection. Plasma globotriaosylsphingosine (lyso-Gb3) was analysed prior to ERT in 84 patients. N215S patients showed later symptom onset (males: p< 0.0001, females: p<0.03), later development of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) (median survival without LVH: 41 (non-N215S) vs. 64 (N215S) years, p< 0.0001), later development of proteinuria (median survival without proteinuria 43 (non-N215S) vs 71 years (N215S), p< 0.0001), later occurrence of cerebrovascular events (stroke/ Transient Ischaemic Attacks (TIA); median survival without stroke: 74 years (non-N215S) vs. not reached (N215S), p< 0.02), later decline in renal function to GFR <60 ml/min/1.73m2 (median survival: 56 (non-N215S) vs. 72 (N215S) years, p< 0.01), and greater overall survival (median survival 81 (N215S) vs. 66 (non-N215S) years, p< 0.0006). Lyso-Gb3 was found to be less elevated in N215S compared to non-N215S male and female patients. However, the N215S population eventually reached an overall severity measured by MSSI comparable to the non-N215S without equivalent elevation of lyso-Gb3 (means: 6.7 vs. 74.3 nmol/L, p < 0.001). In addition, N215S patients showed strong correlations between lyso-Gb3 levels and LVMI, GFR, and MSSI. These associations became stronger when we investigated individuals' life time exposure to lyso-Gb3 (calculated as [lyso-Gb3]*age): MSSI (r2 = 0.88, p< 0.0001), LVMI (r2 = 0.59, p< 0.005), and GFR (r2 = 0.75, p = 0.0001). These results demonstrate that the N215S mutation results in a late onset phenotype involving the heart and other organs. Correlations between clinical manifestations and plasma lyso-Gb3 variations in this group suggest a Fabry-relevant disease mechanism for the heterogeneity observed in this group.",3 4
"Glycogen storage disease type II in Spanish patients: high frequency of c.1076-1G>C mutation. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Child Child, Preschool Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Homozygote Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Lysosomes Middle Aged Mutation Spain alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II is an autosomal recessive disorder of glycogen metabolism due to deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase. We present the molecular and enzymatic analyses of 22 Spanish GSD II patients. Molecular analyses revealed nine novel mutations. The most common defects were mutations c.-32-13T>G (25%) and c.1076-1G>C (14%) and we report the first homozygous patient for c.1076-1G>C mutation presenting with an infantile form. Alleles bearing mutation c.-32-13T>G are associated with the same haplotype.",3 1 4
"Variations in genotype-phenotype correlations in phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Chinese Han population. || Alleles Asian Continental Ancestry Group China Exons Genetic Association Studies Genetic Loci Genomics Genotype Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Prognosis || The value of genotyping to predict variant phenotypes in patients with phenylalanine hydroxylase (Pah) deficiency is a matter of debate. However, there exists no comprehensive population relationship study focused on the Han Chinese. We analyzed genotype-phenotype correlation for 186 different genotypes in 338 unrelated Chinese patients harboring 109 different Pah mutations. Two systems were used in this process. The first was a phenotype prediction system based on arbitrary values (AV) attributed to each mutation. The second was a pair-wise correlation analysis. The observed phenotype for AV analysis was the corresponding metabolic phenotype stratified according to the pretreatment phenylalanine (Phe) value. We found that the observed phenotype matched the predicted phenotype in 54.41% of 272 patients for whom AV information was available; the highest degree of concordance (61.83%) was found in patients with null/null genotypes, whereas the lowest ""concordance rate"" (32.69%) was observed for patients with expected mild-PKU phenotype. There are repeated inconsistencies for such mutations as R241C, R243Q, R261Q, V388M, V399V, R408Q, A434D and EX6-96A>G which are associated with variable phenotypes in patients with identical genotype. Significant correlations were disclosed between pretreatment Phe values and predicted residual activity (r=-0.45643, P<0.0001) or AV sum (r=-0.59523, P<0.0001). Our study supports the notion that the Pah mutation genotype is the main determinant of metabolic phenotype in most patients in a particular population, and provided novel insights into the values that underpin the subsequent treatment and the prognosis of PKU in Chinese.",3 1
"Relationship among genotype, biochemical phenotype, and cognitive performance in females with phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency: report from the Maternal Phenylketonuria Collaborative Study. || Female Genotype Humans Intelligence Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || To examine the relationship of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotypes to biochemical phenotype and cognitive development in maternal phenylketonuria (PKU). PAH gene mutations were examined in 222 hyperphenylalaninemic females enrolled in the Maternal PKU Collaborative Study (MPKUCS). A total of 84 different mutations were detected, and complete genotype was obtained in 199 individuals. Based on previous knowledge about mutation-phenotype associations, 78 of the mutations could be assigned to one of four classes of severity (severe PKU, moderate PKU, mild PKU, and mild hyperphenylalaninemia [MHP]). Then, 189 MPKUCS subjects were grouped according to the various combinations of mutation classifications. The sample sizes were large enough for statistical testing in four groups with at least one mutation that completely abolishes enzyme activity. These patients are considered functionally hemizygous. The biochemical phenotype predicted from the genotype in functionally hemizygous patients was related significantly to the assigned phenylalanine level. Cognitive performance (IQ) was also significantly related to genotype. The IQ of PAH-deficient mothers with a severe PKU mutation in combination with a MHP mutation or a mild PKU mutation was 99 and 96, respectively, whereas the IQ of PKU mothers with two severe PKU mutations or with one severe and one moderate PKU mutation was 83 and 84, respectively. Of the patients with PKU, 92% had been treated during childhood. Those who were untreated or treated late had lower than average IQ scores for their group of mutation combinations. Females with moderate or mild PKU who were treated early and treated for >6 years showed IQ scores 10 points above average for their group. The reproductive outcome in maternal phenylketonuria is dependent on prenatal metabolic control and postnatal environmental circumstances. Both factors depend on the intellectual resources of the mother with PKU. The significant relationship among genotype, biochemical phenotype, and cognitive performance observed in the present study is of importance for the development of an optimal strategy for future treatment of females with PKU who plan pregnancy.",3
"Molecular genetics of phenylketonuria in Orientals: linkage disequilibrium between a termination mutation and haplotype 4 of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Base Sequence China Genetic Linkage Haplotypes Humans Molecular Sequence Data Oligonucleotide Probes Peptide Chain Termination, Translational Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a common metabolic disorder among Chinese, with a prevalence of about 1 in 16,500 births. This frequency is very similar to that among Caucasians. Individual exons of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene with flanking introns were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and cloned into M13 for sequence analysis. An Arg111-to-Ter111 mutation has been identified in exon 3 of the PAH gene in a Chinese PKU patient. The mutation is in linkage disequilibrium with the mutant haplotype 4 alleles which are the most prevalent haplotype among the Orientals. The mutation accounts for about 10% of the Chinese PKU alleles and is absent from the Caucasians, demonstrating that independent mutational events have occurred in the PAH locus after racial divergence.",3
"High frequency of de novo mutations in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Li-Fraumeni syndrome is an autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome caused by germline mutations in the TP53 gene. The frequency of germline de novo TP53 mutations is largely unknown; few unequivocal de novo mutations have been reported. Of 341 patients with early onset cancer sent for clinical testing to a national reference laboratory, 75 patients had TP53 germline mutations. Five (7%) de novo mutations were identified, as well as an additional 10 TP53 germline mutations likely to be de novo by family history. The frequency of de novo TP53 mutations in this patient sample is at least 7% and may be as high as 20%. The possibility that de novo germline TP53 mutations are relatively common has implications for testing and the identification of potential Li-Fraumeni syndrome in patients with little or no family history of cancer.",3
"Endoplasmic reticulum stress induces autophagy through activation of p38 MAPK in fibroblasts from Pompe disease patients carrying c.546G>T mutation. || 1-Deoxynojirimycin Autophagy Cells, Cultured DNA Mutational Analysis Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Enzyme Activation Enzyme Activators Fibroblasts Glycogen Storage Disease Type II MAP Kinase Signaling System Phosphoproteins Phosphorylation Point Mutation Protein Folding Protein Isoforms Unfolded Protein Response alpha-Glucosidases p38 Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases || Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II) is an autosomal recessive myopathic disorder arising from the deficiency of lysosomal acid α-glucosidase (GAA). Activation of autophagy is a key pathophysiological feature in skeletal muscle fibers and fibroblasts from patients with Pompe disease. The accumulation of autophagic vacuoles has been shown to interfere with the efficacy of enzyme replacement therapy with recombinant human GAA. However, the induction mechanism of autophagy in Pompe disease is still unclear. In this study, we show that misfolded GAA-induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress triggers autophagy in a manner regulated by p38 MAPK signaling pathways in fibroblasts from late-onset patients with Pompe disease. By studying normal fibroblasts and patient fibroblasts carrying a c.546G>T mutation, we uncovered that mutant GAA was rapidly degraded by proteasome. In addition, we found both activation of ER stress response and autophagy in these patient fibroblasts. Treatment with N-butyl-deoxynojirimycin (NB-DNJ), which acts as a pharmacological chaperone for certain mutant forms of GAA, led to attenuation of not only ER stress, but also autophagy in patient fibroblasts. Levels of phosphorylated p38 MAPK observed in patient fibroblasts were decreased after treatment with NB-DNJ. The autophagic response in patient fibroblasts was also negatively regulated by treatment with the p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580. These findings define a critical role for ER stress in the activation of autophagy due to GAA mutation, and provide evidence that chaperone therapy may be a useful treatment for alleviation of autophagy in Pompe disease patients carrying a chaperon-responsive mutation.",3 1
"Detecting multiple lysosomal storage diseases by tandem mass spectrometry--a national newborn screening program in Taiwan. || DNA Dried Blood Spot Testing Fabry Disease Female Gaucher Disease Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant, Newborn Lysosomal Storage Diseases Male Neonatal Screening Pilot Projects Quality Control Reproducibility of Results Sequence Analysis, DNA Taiwan Tandem Mass Spectrometry || Interest in lysosomal storage diseases in newborn screening programs has increased in recent years. Two techniques, fluorescence (4-MU) and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) methods are frequently used. We report a pilot study of large scale newborn screening for Fabry, Pompe, Gaucher, and MPS I diseases by using the MS/MS method in Taiwan and compared the performance of the MS/MS with 4-MU methods. More than 100,000 dried blood spots (DBSs) were collected consecutively as part of the national Taiwan newborn screening programs. The enzyme activities were detected by the MS/MS method from a DBS punch. Mutation analysis was further performed for newborns with detected enzyme deficiency. The DNA sequence analysis for suspected cases revealed 64 newborns with confirmed Fabry mutations, 16 were classified as infantile or late-onset Pompe disease, and 1 was characterized as Gaucher disease. The positive predict value increased from 4.0% to 7.1% in the Pompe study, and from 61.0% to 95.5% in the Fabry study by the MS/MS method compared to 4-MU assay. The MS/MS method has been validated as a more specific, powerful and efficient tool than the 4-MU assay. It also provided a multiplex solution of newborn screening for lysosomal storage diseases.",3 1
"Pompe disease in infants: improving the prognosis by newborn screening and early treatment. || Cardiomyopathies Combined Modality Therapy Disease Progression Follow-Up Studies Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant, Newborn Infusions, Intravenous Neonatal Screening Parenteral Nutrition, Total Physical Therapy Modalities Respiration, Artificial Survival Rate Taiwan alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease causes progressive, debilitating, and often life-threatening musculoskeletal, respiratory, and cardiac symptoms. Favorable outcomes with early intravenous enzyme-replacement therapy and alglucosidase alfa have been reported, but early clinical diagnosis before the development of severe symptoms has rarely been possible in infants. We recently conducted a newborn screening pilot program in Taiwan to improve the early detection of Pompe disease. Six of 206088 newborns screened tested positive and were treated for Pompe disease. Five had the rapidly progressive form of Pompe disease, characterized by cardiac and motor involvement, and were treated soon after diagnosis. The sixth patient was started on treatment at 14 months of age because of progressive muscle weakness. Outcomes were compared with treated patients whose disease was diagnosed clinically and with untreated historical control subjects. At the time of this report, patients had been treated for 14 to 32 months. The 5 infants who had early cardiac involvement demonstrated normalization of cardiac size and muscle pathology with normal physical growth and age-appropriate gains in motor development. The infant without cardiac involvement also achieved normal motor development with treatment. Survival in patients who had newborn screening was significantly improved compared with those in the untreated reference cohort (P = .001). Survival in the treated clinical comparators was reduced but not statistically different from that in the newborn screening group (P = .48). Results from this study indicate that early treatment can benefit infants with Pompe disease and highlight the advantages of early diagnosis, which can be achieved by newborn screening.",3 1
"X-chromosome inactivation in female patients with Fabry disease. || Adult Aged Enzyme Activation Fabry Disease Female Genetic Diseases, X-Linked Heterozygote Humans Kidney Function Tests Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Promoter Regions, Genetic RNA, Long Noncoding Severity of Illness Index Ventricular Remodeling X Chromosome Inactivation Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked genetic disorder caused by the deficient activity of lysosomal α-galactosidase (α-Gal). While males are usually severely affected, clinical presentation in female patients may be more variable ranging from asymptomatic to, occasionally, as severely affected as male patients. The aim of this study was to evaluate the existence of skewed X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) in females with FD, its concordance between tissues, and its contribution to the phenotype. Fifty-six females with FD were enrolled. Clinical and biological work-up included two global scores [Mainz Severity Score Index (MSSI) and DS3], cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, measured glomerular filtration rate, and measurement of α-Gal activity. XCI was analyzed in four tissues using DNA methylation studies. Skewed XCI was found in 29% of the study population. A correlation was found in XCI patterns between blood and the other analyzed tissues although some punctual variability was detected. Significant differences in residual α-Gal levels, severity scores, progression of cardiomyopathy and deterioration of kidney function, depending on the direction and degree of skewing of XCI were evidenced. XCI significantly impacts the phenotype and natural history of FD in females.",3 4
"A family with Fabry disease diagnosed by a single angiokeratoma. ||  || This case presents a 39-year-old gentleman with a single angiokeratoma on the abdomen. Because of a family history of early onset cardiac disease, testing for Fabry disease was performed and a mis-sense mutation (A143T) in the Fabry gene confirmed the diagnosis. The unusual aspect of this case is that the patient otherwise had normal health. His only detectable abnormality was a high serum creatinine at 116 mmol/L. Two further affected males and four carrier females were detected on family screening. We tested a further five patients with a single angiokeratoma for Fabry disease. In the five tested though, no suggestive personal or family history was given for any of the patients and no further cases were detected. This case highlights the need for vigilance within dermatology clinics to consider Fabry disease even if a solitary angiokeratoma is the only presenting feature. Some patients do display a milder phenotype and thus a detailed family history should always be taken. As in this case, a solitary angiokeratoma and a suspicious family history may be the only clue. Because enzyme replacement therapy is now available, the potential benefits for the patient and their family are high.",2 3
"Phenotypic findings of Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-Zonana syndrome in a family associated with a single germline mutation in PTEN. || Adult Child Craniofacial Abnormalities Female Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phenotype Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Sequence Analysis, DNA Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Cowden syndrome (CS) and Bannayan-Zonana syndrome (BZS) are two hamartoma syndromes with distinct phenotypic features. Although partial clinical overlap exists between CS and BZS, they are considered to be separate entities. PTEN has been identified as the susceptibility gene for both disorders, suggesting allelism. We have identified a germline mutation, R335X, in PTEN in a family consisting of two female members with the phenotypic findings of CS and two male members with the phenotypic findings of BZS. To our knowledge, this is the first report that shows the presence of separate subjects with CS and with BZS in a single family associated with a single germline PTEN mutation.",3
"Phenylketonuria mutations in Northern China. || China Codon, Nonsense DNA Mutational Analysis Frameshift Mutation Gene Frequency Genotype Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Mutation spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene in patients with phenylketonuria (PKU) in Northern China is described with a discussion on genotype-phenotype correlation. By using PCR/SSCP and DNA sequencing, all exons of PAH gene in the 185 unrelated patients with PKU from Northern China were studied. A total of 70 different mutations, including 42 missense, 12 splice, 7 nonsense, 5 deletion, 3 insertion, and 1 silence/splice mutations, were detected in 349/370 mutant alleles (94.3%). Deletion, insertion, and frameshift mutations were found for the first time in China PKU patients. The mutations R243Q, EX6-96A>G, R111X, Y356X, and R413P were the prevalent mutations with relative frequencies of 22.2, 11.1, 8.7, 6.5, and 6.5%, respectively. Fifteen novel mutations were identified in this study: I38fsX19, IVS4+3G>C, Y154H, R157K, R157I, T200fsX6, Q267H, Q267E, F302fsX39, G346R, S349A, L367L, R400K, IVS12+4A>G, and IVS12+6T>A. Each of them occurs at very low frequency (0.3-1.1%). The mutation spectrum of PKU in Chinese is similar to other Asian populations but significantly different from European populations. Altogether, 70 different mutations are found in 109 genotypes distributed among 185 PKU patients. As shown by the analysis, the predicted residual activity found in the majority of PKU individuals match their in vivo phenotypes, though evidence is also found for both phenotypic inconsistencies among subjects with similar genotypes and discordance between the in vitro and in vivo effects of some mutant alleles. The study enables us to construct a national database in China serving as a valuable tool for genetic counseling and prognostic evaluation of future cases of PKU.",3 1
"Germline PTEN promoter mutations and deletions in Cowden/Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome result in aberrant PTEN protein and dysregulation of the phosphoinositol-3-kinase/Akt pathway. || Base Sequence Breast Neoplasms Case-Control Studies DNA Exons Female Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic Promoter Regions, Genetic Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Proto-Oncogene Proteins Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt Sequence Deletion Syndrome Thyroid Neoplasms Tumor Suppressor Proteins Uterine Neoplasms || Germline intragenic mutations in PTEN are associated with 80% of patients with Cowden syndrome (CS) and 60% of patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS). The underlying genetic causes remain to be determined in a considerable proportion of classic CS and BRRS without a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-detectable PTEN mutation. We hypothesized that gross gene deletions and mutations in the PTEN promoter might alternatively account for a subset of apparently mutation-negative patients with CS and BRRS. Using real time and multiplex PCR techniques, we identified three germline hemizygous PTEN deletions in 122 apparently mutation-negative patients with classic CS (N=95) or BRRS (N=27). Fine mapping suggested that one deletion encompassed the whole gene and the other two included exon 1 and encompassed exons 1-5 of PTEN, respectively. Two patients with the deletion were diagnosed with BRRS, and one patient with the deletion was diagnosed with BRRS/CS overlap (features of both). Thus 3 (11%) of 27 patients with BRRS or BRRS/CS-overlap had PTEN deletions. Analysis of the PTEN promoter revealed nine cases (7.4%) harboring heterozygous germline mutations. All nine had classic CS, representing almost 10% of all subjects with CS. Eight had breast cancers and/or benign breast tumors but, otherwise, oligo-organ involvement. PTEN protein analysis, from one deletion-positive and five PTEN-promoter-mutation-positive samples, revealed a 50% reduction in protein and multiple bands of immunoreactive protein, respectively. In contrast, control samples showed only the expected band. Further, an elevated level of phosphorylated Akt was detected in the five promoter-mutation-positive samples, compared with controls, indicating an absence of or marked reduction in functional PTEN. These data suggest that patients with BRRS and CS without PCR-detected intragenic PTEN mutations be offered clinical deletion analysis and promoter-mutation analysis, respectively.",3
"Breast Cancer and Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in a Young Male with Cowden Syndrome. || Adult Breast Neoplasms, Male Child Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Lymphoma, Non-Hodgkin Male Pedigree || Male breast cancer (MBC) is unusual, especially in young adults. Most cases of MBC as a secondary malignancy relate to the previous treatment with ionizing radiation. MBC can be associated with mutations in hereditary cancer predisposition syndrome genes (i.e., BRCA2); however, no such association has been reported in patients with Cowden syndrome (involving the phosphatase and tensin homolog [PTEN] gene). We describe a patient with Cowden syndrome who was initially diagnosed with B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma at the age of 7 years, then MBC at the age of 31 years, and never received radiation therapy.",3
"Mutation spectrum and genotype-phenotype analyses in Cowden disease and Bannayan-Zonana syndrome, two hamartoma syndromes with germline PTEN mutation. || Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10 Exons Female Genes, Tumor Suppressor Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phenotype Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Syndrome Tumor Cells, Cultured Tumor Suppressor Proteins || The tumour suppressor gene PTEN , which maps to 10q23.3 and encodes a 403 amino acid dual specificity phosphatase (protein tyrosine phosphatase; PTPase), was shown recently to play a broad role in human malignancy. Somatic PTEN deletions and mutations were observed in sporadic breast, brain, prostate and kidney cancer cell lines and in several primary tumours such as endometrial carcinomas, malignant melanoma and thyroid tumours. In addition, PTEN was identified as the susceptibility gene for two hamartoma syndromes: Cowden disease (CD; MIM 158350) and Bannayan-Zonana (BZS) or Ruvalcaba-Riley-Smith syndrome (MIM 153480). Constitutive DNA from 37 CD families and seven BZS families was screened for germline PTEN mutations. PTEN mutations were identified in 30 of 37 (81%) CD families, including missense and nonsense point mutations, deletions, insertions, a deletion/insertion and splice site mutations. These mutations were scattered over the entire length of PTEN , with the exception of the first, fourth and last exons. A 'hot spot' for PTEN mutation in CD was identified in exon 5 that contains the PTPase core motif, with 13 of 30 (43%) CD mutations identified in this exon. Seven of 30 (23%) were within the core motif, the majority (five of seven) of which were missense mutations, possibly pointing to the functional significance of this region. Germline PTEN mutations were identified in four of seven (57%) BZS families studied. Interestingly, none of these mutations was observed in the PTPase core motif. It is also worthy of note that a single nonsense point mutation, R233X, was observed in the germline DNA from two unrelated CD families and one BZS family. Genotype-phenotype studies were not performed on this small group of BZS families. However, genotype-phenotype analysis inthe group of CD families revealed two possible associations worthy of follow-up in independent analyses. The first was an association noted in the group of CD families with breast disease. A correlation was observed between the presence/absence of a PTEN mutation and the type of breast involvement (unaffected versus benign versus malignant). Specifically and more directly, an association was also observed between the presence of a PTEN mutation and malignant breast disease. Secondly, there appeared to be an interdependent association between mutations upstream and within the PTPase core motif, the core motif containing the majority of missense mutations, and the involvement of all major organ systems (central nervous system, thyroid, breast, skin and gastrointestinal tract). However, these observations would need to be confirmed by studying a larger number of CD families.",3
"Rapid Immunochromatographic Detection of Serum Anti-α-Galactosidase A Antibodies in Fabry Patients after Enzyme Replacement Therapy. || Adolescent Adult Antibodies Child Chromatography, Affinity Enzyme Replacement Therapy Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay Fabry Disease Female Genotype Humans Isoenzymes Male Middle Aged Phenotype Recombinant Proteins Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || We developed an immunochromatography-based assay for detecting antibodies against recombinant α-galactosidase A proteins in serum. The evaluation of 29 serum samples from Fabry patients, who had received enzyme replacement therapy with agalsidase alpha and/or agalsidase beta, was performed by means of this assay method, and the results clearly revealed that the patients exhibited the same level of antibodies against both agalsidase alpha and agalsidase beta, regardless of the species of recombinant α-galactosidase A used for enzyme replacement therapy. A conventional enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay supported the results. Considering these, enzyme replacement therapy with agalsidase alpha or agalsidase beta would generate antibodies against the common epitopes in both agalsidase alpha and agalsidase beta. Most of the patients who showed immunopositive reaction exhibited classic Fabry phenotype and harbored gene mutations affecting biosynthesis of α-galactosidase A. As immunochromatography is a handy and simple assay system which can be available at bedside, this assay method would be extremely useful for quick evaluation or first screening of serum antibodies against agalsidase alpha or agalsidase beta in Fabry disease with enzyme replacement therapy.",3 4
"Novel mutation of the PTEN gene in an Italian Cowden's disease kindred. ||  || Cowden disease (CD) is an autosomal dominant multiple hamartoma syndrome with an elevated risk of thyroid and breast cancers. The CD susceptibility gene has recently been identified as the PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 gene localized at 10q23 and coding for a dual specificity protein phosphatase. We report the mutational analysis of the PTEN gene in one Italian CD kindred. By using the single strand conformation polymorphism technique and subsequent direct DNA sequencing of the polymerase chain reaction product, we identified a novel mutation in the exon 5 of the PTEN gene. A heterozygous germline TGT-TAT transition was detected at the nucleotide 407; this causes the amino acid substitution cys136-tyr136 and the generation of a new NSI I restriction site. This mutation was not detected in the unaffected member of the family thereby indicating that it is causally linked to the disease. We ruled out that this mutation is a polymorphic variant because it was not detected in over 100 chromosomes analyzed. Using reverse trancriptase-polymerase chain reaction, we detected the expression of the mutant allele in lymphocytes and pathological tissues from an affected member of the family.",2 3
"Duodenal carcinoma in a 37-year-old man with Cowden/Bannayan syndrome. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adenocarcinoma Adult Chemotherapy, Adjuvant Duodenal Neoplasms Endoscopy, Digestive System Gene Expression Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Intestinal Polyps Male Microsatellite Instability MutL Protein Homolog 1 Mutation Nuclear Proteins PTEN Phosphohydrolase Tomography, X-Ray Computed || A 37-year-old man was hospitalised because of anaemia and fatigue due to an infiltrating adenocarcinoma of the Treitz angle (duodenum), together with gastric, duodenal and colorectal polyps. After the operation, removal of colorectal lesions revealed the presence of ganglioneuromatosis of the large bowel. Further investigations showed lack of MLH1 protein expression and microsatellite instability in the duodenal neoplasm, while the gene was normally expressed in the polyps. MLH1 sequence and Multiple Ligation-dependent Probes Amplification analysis (from constitutional DNA) were normal. Analysis of the PTEN gene revealed the presence of a constitutional mutation (c.510 T>A; p.Ser170Arg) which had been associated with the Cowden phenotype. Further detailed clinical investigations revealed macrocephaly (63 cm), melanotic spots of the penis, small angiomas, millimetric trichilemmomas in the nose and multiple lipomas, which led to the diagnosis of Cowden/Bannayan disease. The unusual appearance of a duodenal carcinoma as the first symptom rendered the identification of the syndrome extremely difficult.",3
"A novel HER2-positive breast cancer phenotype arising from germline TP53 mutations. || Adult Breast Neoplasms DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Amplification Germ-Line Mutation Humans Immunohistochemistry In Situ Hybridization Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Receptor, ErbB-2 Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Young Adult || The Li-Fraumeni Syndrome is caused by a germline TP53 mutation and is associated with a high risk of breast cancer at young ages. Basal (triple negative) breast cancers are now well recognised to be a typical sub-type of breast cancer developing in a large proportion of BRCA1 gene carriers. We considered whether a similar narrow sub-type of breast cancer was found in TP53 gene mutation carriers. A hypothesis generating study to investigate whether there are specific breast tumour characteristics associated with germline TP53 mutations. Pathological characteristics in 12 breast cancers arising in nine patients carrying pathogenic TP53 mutations were compared to a reference panel of 231 young onset breast tumours included in the POSH study. Patients carrying a TP53 mutation showed a significantly higher likelihood of developing a breast cancer with Human Epidermal growth factor Receptor (HER2) amplification (83%) when compared to the cohort of young onset breast cancer cases (16%); ER and PR status were equivalent between groups. These findings suggest that breast cancer developing on a background of an inherited TP53 mutation is highly likely to present with amplification of HER2.",3
"Eight new mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in Italian patients with hyperphenylalaninemia. ||  || This report identifies eight new mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene detected in Italian patients with hyperphenylalaninemia. The trivial name of the mutations, predicted phenotypic effect, and population of origin (Italian region) are as follows: F55L (nonconservative change: classic, moderate, mild PKU ?; Sicily), IVS2nt-13 (splicing defect, classic PKU; Tuscany), I65N (nonconservative change classic, moderate, mild PKU ?; Sicily), H201Y (non-PKU HPA; Sicily), I269L (non-PKU HPA, or polymorphism; Sicily), IVS7nt3 (splicing defect or polymorphism; Sicily), I283N (classic PKU; Sicily), IVS12nt2 (splicing defect, classic PKU; Sicily and Apulia). In Sicily, the relative frequency of mutations F55L, I65N, H201Y, I269L, IVS7nt3, I283N, IVS12nt2 is < 1%. The seven new mutations identified in the Sicilian population increase the remarkable genetic heterogeneity typical of this population with an estimated homozygosity value at the PAH locus of 0.041.",3 1
"Illegitimate transcription of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in lymphocytes for identification of mutations in phenylketonuria. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Codon DNA Exons Glutamates Glutamic Acid Glycine Humans Infant Leucine Liver Lymphocytes Male Molecular Sequence Data Oligodeoxyribonucleotides Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Point Mutation Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Transcription, Genetic || Taking advantage of the 'illegitimate' transcription of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene, we have been able to analyse the PAH cDNA sequence of hyperphenylalaninemic children in circulating lymphocytes. Using this approach, we have also identified 3 novel mutations in cDNA from liver and lymphocytes of two patients. One mutation, detected by the abnormal pattern of migration of an amplified fragment, is a C to T transition in the splice acceptor site of intron 10, which resulted in the skipping of exon 11 with the premature termination of RNA translation downstream from exon 12 (-3 IVS10). The other two mutations are missense mutations in exons 10 and 11 (respectively, L333F and E390G). The present study supports the view that circulating lymphocytes give easy access to PAH gene transcripts whose nucleotide sequence is identical to that reported in liver and therefore represent a useful tool for molecular genetic studies in phenylketonuria.",3 1 0
"Fibromyalgia-like symptoms associated with irritable bowel syndrome: A challenging diagnosis of late-onset Pompe disease. || Adult Diagnosis, Differential Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Fibromyalgia Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Irritable Bowel Syndrome Pregnancy Pregnancy Complications || Late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder which usually presents as a limb-girdle myopathy with early respiratory involvement. We report 2 sisters with an uncommon presentation of LOPD characterized by fibromyalgia-like pain associated with irritable bowel syndrome. In both sisters, clinical examination was normal and had remained stable for 10 years. The serum creatine kinase level was mildly elevated. Several muscle biopsies showed slight nonspecific myopathic abnormalities. A dried blood spot test indicated acid maltase deficiency. The diagnosis of LOPD was confirmed genetically. Both sisters subsequently developed proximal muscle weakness after pregnancy and started enzyme replacement therapy. Under treatment, gastrointestinal symptoms improved, but pain persisted. Clinicians should be aware of this atypical presentation of LOPD to enable earlier diagnosis and treatment.",3 1 4
"Mutation at the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) and its use to document population genetic variation: the Quebec experience. || Alleles Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Chromosomes, Human, Pair 12 Databases, Factual Genetic Variation Haplotypes Homozygote Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Quebec || We describe variation at the PAH locus in the population of Quebec. We successfully analyzed 135 of 141 chromosomes from phenylketonuria (PKU) probands (95.7% of the sample), and eight additional chromosomes from a small number of probands with non-PKU hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA). The full set of chromosomes harboured 45 different PAH mutations: i) seven polymorphisms (IVS2nt19, IVS3nt-22, IVS6nt-55, Q232Q, V245V, L385L, Y414Y); ii) four mutations causing non-PKU HPA (T92I, E390G, R408Q, D415N); iii) 34 mutations causing PKU. Only six mutations (M1V, R261Q, F299C, S349P, R408W and IVS12nt1) occurred in the whole province at relative frequencies > 5%: most are rare and probably identical by descent. By studying associations of mutations with polymorphic haplotype alleles, we found examples of mutations on different haplotypes that were identical by state, but not by descent because they were recurrent mutations (E280K and R408W); and examples of mutations identical both by state and by descent because of intragenic recombination (S67P, G218V, V245A and IVS12nt1). Ten mutations were first described in Quebec and five are still unique there; three of these 'Quebec' mutations are reported here for the first time (c.125A-->T (K42I); [c.470G-->A; c.471A--C] (R157N); c.707nt-55 (IVS6nt-55). The PAH mutations stratify by geographic region and population, their distributions validating hypotheses about European range expansion to North America during three separate phases of immigration and demographic expansion in the Quebec region over the past four centuries. The PAH homozygosity value (j) is 0.06 for the total Quebec sample (0.5-0.08 by regions), and the corresponding homoallelic fraction of mutant PAH genotypes is 24%. These findings are a documentation of genetic diversity in the Quebec population.",3 4
"[Analysis for phenylalanine hydroxylase gene mutations in 35 ethnic Hui children from Ningxia with phenylketonuria]. ||  || To determine the type and frequency of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) mutations in ethnic Hui patients from Ningxia with phenylketonuria (PKU). For 35 PKU children patients and 50 healthy individuals, all exons and promoters of the PAH gene were analyzed with PCR and direct sequencing. Twenty mutations, including 8 missense mutations (40%), 5 nonsense mutations (25%), 4 splice site mutations (20%) and 3 deletion mutants (15%) were discovered. The overall detection rate was 68.57% (48/70). Common mutations have included R243Q (12.86%), R241C (11.43%), EX6-96A to G (5.71%), Y356X (5.71%), R413P(4.29%) and Q232X(4.29%), whilst rarer ones have included S16fsX10 (2.86%), R111X (2.86%) and L430P (2.86%). Among these, S16fsX10, L430P, D222G and IVS11+ 1G to A have not been reported previously. Y414X and S303fsX38 have not been reported in Hui ethnic group. No mutation was detected in the 50 normal controls. The types and distribution of PAH gene mutations in ethnic Hui from Ningxia have been different from other areas of China. The mutations also showed a rich diversity.",3
"Molecular and in silico analyses of the full-length isoform of usherin identify new pathogenic alleles in Usher type II patients. ||  || The usherin gene (USH2A) has been screened for mutations causing Usher syndrome type II (USH2). Two protein isoforms have been identified: a short isoform of 1,546 amino acids and a more recently recognized isoform extending to 5,202 amino acids. We have screened the full length by genomic sequencing. We confirm that many mutations occur in the exons contributing solely to the longer form. USH2 is an autosomal recessive disorder and, in contrast to previous studies, both mutations were identified in 23 patients and a single mutation in 2 out of 33 patients. A total of 34 distinct mutated alleles were identified, including one complex allele with three variants and another with two. A total of 27 of these are novel, confirming that most mutations in usherin are private. Many of the mutations will lead to prematurely truncated protein but as there are a substantial number of missense variants, we have used in silico analysis to assess their pathogenicity. Evidence that they are disease-causing has been produced by protein alignments and three-dimensional (3D) structural predictions when possible. We have identified a previously unrecognized cysteine rich structural domain, containing 12 dicysteine repeats, and show that three missense mutations result in the loss of one of a pair of the defining cysteine-cysteine pairs.",2 1 3
"Genetic variants associated with gastrointestinal symptoms in Fabry disease. || ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily B, Member 11 Adult Fabry Disease Female Gastrointestinal Diseases Genetic Variation Genotyping Techniques Humans Male Middle Aged Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Precision Medicine || Gastrointestinal symptoms (GIS) are often among the earliest presenting events in Fabry disease (FD), an X-linked lysosomal disorder caused by the deficiency of α-galactosidase A. Despite recent advances in clinical and molecular characterization of FD, the pathophysiology of the GIS is still poorly understood. To shed light either on differential clinical presentation or on intervariability of GIS in FD, we genotyped 1936 genetic markers across 231 genes that encode for drug-metabolizing enzymes and drug transport proteins in 49 FD patients, using the DMET Plus platform. All nine single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) mapped within four genes showed statistically significant differences in genotype frequencies between FD patients who experienced GIS and patients without GIS: ABCB11 (odd ratio (OR) = 18.07, P = 0,0019; OR = 8.21, P = 0,0083; OR=8.21, P = 0,0083; OR = 8.21, P = 0,0083),SLCO1B1 (OR = 9.23, P = 0,0065; OR = 5.08, P = 0,0289; OR = 8.21, P = 0,0083), NR1I3 (OR = 5.40, P = 0,0191) and ABCC5 (OR = 14.44, P = 0,0060). This is the first study that investigates the relationships between genetic heterogeneity in drug absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion (ADME) related genes and GIS in FD. Our findings provide a novel genetic variant framework which warrants further investigation for precision medicine in FD.",3 4
"A molecular analysis of the GAA gene and clinical spectrum in 38 patients with Pompe disease in Japan. ||  || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by acid α-glucosidase (GAA) deficiency, which results in the accumulation of glycogen in lysosomes in multiple tissues, including cardiac, skeletal, and smooth muscle cells. Thus far, 558 sequence variants of the GAA gene have been published in the Pompe Disease Mutation Database, and some mutations appear with considerable frequency in particular ethnic groups, such as Caucasians, Taiwanese, Chinese, and Koreans. However, the GAA mutation pattern in Japanese patients remains poorly understood. We analyzed the relationship between the genetic and clinical features of 38 mostly Japanese patients with Pompe disease from 35 unrelated families. We identified 28 different GAA gene mutations, including 7 novel mutations, by a GAA gene analysis. c.546G > T (22.9%) and c.1857C > G (14.3%) were the most common mutations and accounted for 37.1% of the total mutant alleles. In the six patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD), c.1857C > G was also the most common mutation. In addition, there were 13 homozygotes (5 with the c.546G > T) among the 35 families, which is the highest frequency reported thus far. Regarding the initial symptoms, cardiomegaly was the most common (3/6 = 50%) in IOPD patients, while muscle weakness was observed the most frequently in patients with late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) (15/30 = 50%). Notably, all IOPD patients who showed respiratory distress at the time of onset require respiratory assistance at present (4/4 = 100%). Regarding the presenting symptoms, cardiomegaly (6/6 = 100%) and hepatomegaly (4/6 = 66.7%) were more commonly seen in IOPD, and muscle weakness (24/29 = 82.7%) was observed more frequently in LOPD. Respiratory assistance is required at present in 33.3% of IOPD patients and 50% of LOPD patients, and 20% of IOPD patients and 29.6% of LOPD patients are wheelchair users. These individual clinical courses may be influenced by the timing of the diagnosis and treatment; for example, in 2007, an ERT orphan drug for treatment of Pompe disease, Alglucosidase alfa, was made available in Japan, and there were 5 (5/6 = 83.3%) wheelchair users diagnosed from 2008 to 2009 (cases 32-38) and 4 (4/27 = 14.8%) from 2010 to 2015 (cases 1-31). These findings underscore the importance of the early diagnosis and treatment.",3 1 4
"Molecular characterization of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Chile. Mutations in brief no. 243. Online. ||  || Both the haplotype distribution and the mutational spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene has been defined for the Chilean phenylketonuria (PKU) population. Mutation analysis was performed using a combined approach of screening for common European and Oriental mutations and application of the DGGE scanning method in the remaining uncharacterized alleles. A total of 16 different mutations have been identified, including two novel ones, Q232X and IVS11nt5. The most frequent mutations were IVS10nt-11 and V388M present both in the 13% of the mutant chromosomes. The rest of the mutations are rare. The haplotype association including VNTR and STR alleles, was examined to investigated the origin and distribution of PAH alleles in Chile. Our results are consistent with Southern Europeans as the major source of PAH mutations in Latin America. However, we have also detected mutations from East and Central Europe, such IVS12nt1, R408W and R252W. It is clear that the PKU mutation present in each Latin American country varies with the demographic profile and specific mutation scanning is necessary in each population both for diagnostic and prognostic purposes. The correlation between the genotypes and the phenotypes is consistent with the emerging pattern of mutation severity deduced from previous studies in related populations.",3
"Should genetic analysis in newborn screening and a heterozygote test for hyperphenylalaninaemia be recommended? An Italian study. ||  || To determine whether the introduction of genetic analysis for phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency into regional screening programmes can be supported by the benefit-cost ratio. Tests for the genetic PAH locus were carried out in 151 patients with hyperphenylalaninaemia originally from all of the Italian regions. PAH mutations were identified by extraction of genomic DNA from leucocytes (whole blood in EDTA), PAH exon amplification was determined by polymerase chain reaction, restriction enzyme analysis was carried out for some recognised mutations, and DNA sequence analysis for the other mutations. It was found that the eight most common mutations in the population accounted for 49% of the mutant alleles, which is well below the required standard for effective population screening (90%). Genetic screening for PAH deficiency in Italy does not increase the sensitivity of the methodology and the benefit-cost ratio, and thus provides no advantage, particularly as the correlation between genotype and the metabolic phenotype needed to optimise dietary intervention is still being studied.",3
"Cessation and resuming of alglucosidase alfa in Pompe disease: a retrospective analysis. || Adult Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Middle Aged Muscle Strength Respiration Retrospective Studies Switzerland Time Factors Treatment Outcome Vital Capacity Walking alpha-Glucosidases || Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with recombinant human alglucosidase alfa (rhGAA) in late-onset Pompe disease is moderately effective. Little is known about the clinical course after treatment termination and the resumption of ERT. In Switzerland, rhGAA therapy for Pompe disease was temporarily withdrawn after the federal court judged that the treatment costs were greatly out of proportion compared to the benefits. Re-treatment was initiated after the therapy was finally licensed. We retrospectively analysed seven Pompe patients, who underwent cessation and resumption of ERT (median age 43 years). The delay from first symptoms to final diagnosis ranged from 4 to 20 years. The demographics, clinical characteristics, assessments with the 6-min walking test (6-MWT), the predicted forced vital capacity (FVC) and muscle strength were analysed. Before initiation of ERT, all patients suffered from proximal muscle weakness of the lower limbs; one was wheelchair-bound and two patients received night-time non-invasive ventilation. Initial treatment stabilised respiratory function in most patients and improved their walking performance. After treatment cessation, upright FVC declined in most and the 6-MWT declined in all patients. Two patients needed additional non-invasive ventilatory support. Twelve months after resuming ERT, the respiratory and walking capacity improved again in most patients. However, aside for one patient, none of the patients reached the same level of respiratory function or distance walked in 6 min, as at the time of ERT withdrawal. We conclude that cessation of ERT in Pompe disease causes a decline in clinical function and should be avoided. Resuming treatment only partially recovers respiratory function and walking capacity.",3 1
"Molecular genetics of tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. ||  || Mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene result in phenylketonuria (PKU). Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4))-responsive hyperphenylalaninemia has been recently described as a variant of PAH deficiency caused by specific mutations in the PAH gene. It has been suggested that BH(4)-responsiveness may be predicted from the corresponding genotypes. Data from BH(4) loading tests indicated an incidence of BH(4)-responsiveness of >40% in the general PKU population and >80% in mild PKU patients. The current project entailed genotype analysis of 315 BH(4)-responsive patients tabulated in the BIOPKUdb database and comparison with the data from the PAHdb locus-specific knowledgebase, as well as with previously published PAH mutations for several European countries, Northern China, and South Korea. We identified 57 mutations, presenting with a substantial residual PAH activity (average approximately 47%), presumed to be associated with BH(4)-responsiveness. More than 89% of patients are found to be compound heterozygotes. The three most common mutations found in >5% of BH(4)-responsive patients are p.A403 V, p.R261Q, and p.Y414C. Using the Hardy-Weinberg formula the predicted average frequency of BH(4)-responsiveness in European populations was calculated to be 55% (range 17-79%, lowest in Baltic countries and Poland and highest in Spain), 57% in Northern China, and 55% for South Korea. The genotype-predicted prevalence of BH(4)-responsiveness was higher than prevalence data obtained from BH(4) loading tests. Inconsistent results were observed for mutations p.L48S, p.I65 T, p.R158Q, p.R261Q, and p.Y414C. Our data suggest that BH(4)-responsiveness may be more common than assumed and to some extent may be predicted or excluded from the patient's genotype.",3 1 0
"Screening patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy for Fabry disease using a filter-paper test: the FOCUS study. || Adolescent Adult Aged Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Clinical Enzyme Tests Cohort Studies Early Diagnosis Fabry Disease Female Humans Leukocytes Male Middle Aged Sensitivity and Specificity Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Patients with Fabry disease (FD) show left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) mimicking hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) of sarcomeric origin and might benefit, if detected early, from specific enzyme replacement therapy. The prevalence of FD in patients with LVH of 13 mm or greater, screened using the leucocyte alpha-galactosidase A (α-gal A) activity test, a technique that is difficult to apply routinely, ranged from 0% to 6%. To screen systematically for FD in patients with a diagnosis of HCM (LVH ≥15 mm) in primary cardiology practice, a validated, physician-friendly α-gal A assay was used on dried blood spots using a filter paper test. A cohort of 392 adults (278 men) followed for HCM were screened for FD. A standard blood test was used for confirmation in nine men in whom the α-gal A result was 40% or less. Four men (1.5%; 1.8% of men ≥40 years vs 0% <40 years; all with α-gal A <30%), but no women, were diagnosed with FD. Index cases presented with diffuse but asymmetric LVH, with severe obstruction in one case and frequent high-grade atrioventricular conduction block necessitating a pacemaker in three cases. Family screening identified eight additional cases. Genotyping was performed successfully on DNA extracted from the filter papers. In male patients diagnosed as having HCM, pure FD cardiac variants are not exceptional and can be specifically identified using a simple filter-paper test. The sensitivity of this test is low in female patients.",3
"Genetic basis of hearing loss associated with enlarged vestibular aqueducts in Koreans. || Adolescent Adult Biological Transport Case-Control Studies Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Hearing Loss Humans Korea Male Membrane Transport Proteins Polymorphism, Genetic Sulfate Transporters Sulfates Vestibular Aqueduct || Sensorineural hearing loss associated with enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct (EVA) can be associated with mutations of the SLC26A4 gene. In western populations, less than one-half of the affected individuals with EVA have two mutant SLC26A4 alleles, and EVA is frequently caused by unknown genetic or environmental factors alone or in combination with a single SLC26A4 mutation as part of a complex trait. In this study, we ascertained 26 Korean probands with EVA and performed nucleotide sequence analysis to detect SLC26A4 mutations. All subjects had bilateral EVA, and 20 of 26 were sporadic (simplex) cases. Fourteen different mutations were identified, including nine novel mutations. Five mutations were recurrent and accounted for 80% of all mutant alleles, providing a basis for the design and interpretation of cost-efficient mutation detection algorithms. Two mutant alleles were identified in 21 (81%), one mutant allele was detected in three (11%), and zero mutant allele was detected in two (8%) of 26 probands. The high proportion of Korean probands with two SLC26A4 mutations may reflect a reduced frequency of other genetic or environmental factors causing EVA in comparison to western populations.",3 1
"Subset of individuals with autism spectrum disorders and extreme macrocephaly associated with germline PTEN tumour suppressor gene mutations. || Adolescent Amino Acid Sequence Animals Autistic Disorder Child Child, Preschool Craniofacial Abnormalities Female Genes, Tumor Suppressor Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phenotype Sequence Alignment Sequence Homology || The genetic aetiology of autism remains elusive. Occasionally, individuals with Cowden syndrome (a cancer syndrome) and other related hamartoma disorders such as Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, Proteus syndrome, and Proteus-like conditions, are characterised by germline PTEN mutations, and may have neurobehavioural features resembling autism as well as overgrowth and macrocephaly. Therefore, we undertook PTEN gene mutation analysis in 18 subjects mainly prospectively ascertained with autism spectrum disorder and macrocephaly. Of these 18 autistic subjects (13 males and five females; ages 3.1-18.4 years) with a head circumference range from 2.5 to 8.0 standard deviations above the mean, three males (17%) carried germline PTEN mutations. These three probands had previously undescribed PTEN mutations: H93R (exon 4), D252G (exon 7), and F241S (exon 7). They had the larger head circumference measurements amongst all our study subjects. The three residues altered in our patients were highly evolutionarily conserved. We suggest that PTEN gene testing be considered for patients with autistic behaviour and extreme macrocephaly. The gene findings may impact on recurrence risks as well as medical management for the patient.",3 4
"Incidence of BH4-responsiveness in phenylalanine-hydroxylase-deficient Italian patients. || Biopterin Child, Preschool Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Genotype Humans Infant Italy Mutation Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) is an inherited metabolic disorder due to deficiency of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) or its cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4). BH4-responsiveness in PAH-deficient HPA is a recently described characteristic of most milder phenotypes. BH4-responsive patients show reduction of plasma phenylalanine (phe) levels after oral administration of BH4. Determination of the incidence of BH4-responsiveness among a non-selected, cohort population of PAH-deficient hyperphenylalaninemic patients and evaluation of phenotype-genotype correlations. All patients born in Lombardy (Italy) between January 2000 and December 2004, and affected by HPA (107 patients) were classified after BH4 loading test, analysis of urinary pterins, and determination of DHPR activity in blood, and investigated for BH4-responsiveness. 6R-BH4 (20 mg/kg) was administered orally as a single dose and plasma samples were obtained at time-points 0, 4, 8, and 24 h after BH4 administration. In patients with basal plasma phe levels <or=360 mmol/L a combined phe (100 mg phe/kg) and BH4 (20 mg/kg) loading test was performed. Patients were defined ""responsive to BH4"" when plasma phe levels decreased by 30% 8h after oral BH4 administration. BH4 significantly lowered blood phe levels in 91 (85%) of 107 patients affected by PAH-deficient HPA. Most responsive patients were affected by mild HPA (77%), a smaller percentage by mild (7%) and moderate (7%) phenylketonuria (PKU). One patient with classical PKU was responsive to BH4. Eighteen mutations were found to be associated to the BH4-responsive phenotype. BH4-responsiveness is shown by a consistent number of PAH-deficient hyperphenylalaninemic patients and seems to be common in milder phenotypes. Genotype is not the only factor determining BH4-responsiveness.",3 1
"Phenotypical characterization of α-galactosidase A gene mutations identified in a large Fabry disease screening program in stroke in the young. || Adult Belgium Echocardiography Electrocardiography Fabry Disease Female Genetic Testing Glycolipids Humans Male Mutation Phenotype Skin Sphingolipids Stroke Trihexosylceramides Vertebrobasilar Insufficiency Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || In the Belgian Fabry Study (BeFaS), the prevalence of Fabry disease was assessed in 1000 young patients presenting with stroke, unexplained white matter lesions or vertebrobasilar dolichoectasia. The results of the BeFaS suggested that Fabry disease may play a role in up to 1% of young patients presenting with cerebrovascular disease. However, the clinical relevance was unclear in all cases. We report on detailed phenotyping in subjects identified with α-galactosidase A (α-Gal A) enzyme deficiency or GLA mutations identified in the BeFaS (n=10), and on the results of family screening in this population. Family screening was performed to identify additional mutation carriers. Biochemical and/or clinical evaluation of all subjects (BeFaS index patients and relatives carrying a GLA mutation) was performed. Genetic family screening revealed 18 additional GLA mutation carriers. Bloodspot α-Gal A enzyme activity was normal in all GLA mutation carriers, even in 2 males with the p.A143T mutation. Plasma Gb3 and lyso-Gb3 levels were normal in all subjects. Elevated Gb3 in urine was detected in 2 subjects. Some classic clinical signs of Fabry disease, like angiokeratoma or cornea verticillata, could not be detected in our population. Cardiac symptoms of Fabry disease were found in 6 out of 10 p.A143T carriers. No signs of cerebrovascular disease were found in the relatives with a GLA mutation. We could not identify mutations causing the classical clinical phenotype of Fabry disease in our cerebrovascular disease population. Enzyme activity analysis in bloodspots and plasma may fail to identify late-onset variants of Fabry disease. We recommend genetic testing when an atypical, late-onset variant of Fabry disease is suspected in a male cerebrovascular disease patient. However, this may lead to the identification of non-disease causing or controversial genetic variants.",2 0 3
"[Early diagnosis of Fabry disease in children]. || Child Early Diagnosis Fabry Disease Humans Male || Fabry disease, a rare X-linked lysosomal storage disorder, is caused by deficiency of the enzyme α-galactosidase A. The incidence, ranging from one over 40 000 to one over 11 7000 worldwide is probably underestimated due to its unspecific pattern of presentation. The symptoms, including neurological, gastrointestinal, renal, ophthalmological and dermatologic manifestations, start in childhood and adolescence, cause a significant morbidity and are likely to affect the patient's quality of life. Furthermore, Anderson-Fabry disease always progress leading to a multiorgan dysfunction and life-threatening complications with end-stage renal disease, cardiomyopathy and high incidence of stroke. The estimated life in untreated patients is reduced by 15-20 years respectively in men and women. The enzyme replacement therapy, available in Europe from 2001, results in a reduction of major organs failure, morbidity and mortality. We present the case of an 8-year-old male admitted to our Division for overweight with a previous history of acroparesthesias, severe acute pain in hands and feet, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, constipation, bitemporal headache, dyshidrosis, recurrent fever, exercise intolerance and reduced quality of life. The physical examination was within normal limits. The α-galactosidase A activity was deficient in plasma and normal in peripheral leukocytes; the GLA gene showed a nucleotide substitution c.352C>T (p.Arg 118 Cys) in the eson 2 with a residual enzyme activity of the 29% suggesting the diagnosis of Fabry disease. Blood and urine chemistry, the slit-lamp examination and MRI of kidneys, heart and brain excluded any major organ involvement. The enzyme replacement therapy was then started almost three months ago using agasidase alfa at a dose of 0.2 mg/kg infused intravenously every two weeks but, unfortunately, no relief in the symptoms have been reported so far without any severe adverse reactions. This case report aims to point out the importance of an early diagnosis in order to prevent the progression of the disease, the multiorgan failure and to improve the long-term prognosis.",3
"Germline p53 mutations in a cohort with childhood sarcoma: sex differences in cancer risk. || Adolescent Adult Aging Amino Acid Substitution Bone Neoplasms Child Child, Preschool Codon Cohort Studies Exons Female Genes, p53 Genetic Carrier Screening Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Risk Factors Sarcoma Sequence Deletion Sex Characteristics Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || To characterize cancer risk in heterozygous p53 mutation carriers, we analyzed cancer incidence in 56 germline p53 mutation carriers and 3,201 noncarriers from 107 kindreds ascertained through patients with childhood soft-tissue sarcoma who were treated at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. We systematically followed members in these kindreds for cancer incidence for >20 years and evaluated their p53 gene status. We found seven kindreds with germline p53 mutations that include both missense and truncation mutation types. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed similar cancer risks between 21 missense and 35 truncation p53 mutation carriers (log-rank chi(2)=0.04; P=.84). We found a significantly higher cancer risk in female carriers than in male carriers (log-rank chi(2)=12.1; P<.001), a difference not explained by an excess of sex-specific cancer. The calculated standardized incidence ratio (SIR) showed that mutation carriers had a risk for all types of cancer that was much higher than that for the general population (SIR = 41.1; 95% confidence interval [CI] 29.9-55.0) whereas noncarriers had a risk for all types of cancer that was similar to that in the general population (SIR = 0.9; 95% CI 0.8-1.0). The calculated SIRs showed a >100-fold higher risk of sarcoma, female breast cancer, and hematologic malignancies for the p53 mutation carriers and agreed with the findings of an earlier segregation analysis based on the same cohort. These results quantitatively illustrated the spectrum of cancer risk in germline p53 mutation carriers and will provide valuable reference for the evaluation and treatment of patients with cancer.",2 4 3
"A clinical scoring system for selection of patients for PTEN mutation testing is proposed on the basis of a prospective study of 3042 probands. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Child Cohort Studies Female Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases Models, Genetic PTEN Phosphohydrolase Patient Selection Promoter Regions, Genetic Prospective Studies Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt Young Adult || Cowden syndrome (CS) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome are allelic, defined by germline PTEN mutations, and collectively referred to as PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome. To date, there are no existing criteria based on large prospective patient cohorts to select patients for PTEN mutation testing. To address these issues, we conducted a multicenter prospective study in which 3042 probands satisfying relaxed CS clinical criteria were accrued. PTEN mutation scanning, including promoter and large deletion analysis, was performed for all subjects. Pathogenic mutations were identified in 290 individuals (9.5%). To evaluate clinical phenotype and PTEN genotype against protein expression, we performed immunoblotting (PTEN, P-AKT1, P-MAPK1/2) for a patient subset (n = 423). In order to obtain an individualized estimation of pretest probability of germline PTEN mutation, we developed an optimized clinical practice model to identify adult and pediatric patients. For adults, a semiquantitative score-the Cleveland Clinic (CC) score-resulted in a well-calibrated estimation of pretest probability of PTEN status. Overall, decreased PTEN protein expression correlated with PTEN mutation status; decreasing PTEN protein expression correlated with increasing CC score (p < 0.001), but not with the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) criteria (p = 0.11). For pediatric patients, we identified highly sensitive criteria to guide PTEN mutation testing, with phenotypic features distinct from the adult setting. Our model improved sensitivity and positive predictive value for germline PTEN mutation relative to the NCCN 2010 criteria in both cohorts. We present the first evidence-based clinical practice model to select patients for genetics referral and PTEN mutation testing, further supported biologically by protein correlation.",3 4
"The molecular basis of phenylketonuria in Koreans. || DNA Mutational Analysis Gene Frequency Genotype Humans Korea Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Time Factors || Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an inborn error of metabolism that results from a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). We characterized the PAH mutations of 79 independent Korean patients with PKU or hyperphenylalaninemia. PAH nucleotide sequence analysis revealed 39 different mutations, including ten novel mutations. The novel mutations consisted of nine missense mutations (P69S, G103S, N207D, T278S, P281A, L293M, G332V, S391I, and A447P) and a novel splice site variant (IVS10-3C>G). R243Q, IVS4-1G>A, and E6-96A>G were the most prevalent mutations, as they accounted for 32% of the total mutant alleles in this study. Although some common characteristics of allele frequency and distribution were identified among oriental populations, several distinctive characteristics were revealed in Korean patients. Although the R413P allele is the most prevalent form (30.5%) in Japanese, we detected it in only five chromosomes from 158 independent chromosomes (3.2%). The A259T allele, which has not yet been found in oriental populations, was frequently found in this study. We also observed that tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) responsiveness was associated with specific genotypes (R53H, R241C, and R408Q), suggesting there are some correlations between phenotype and genotype.",3 1
"High antibody titer in an adult with Pompe disease affects treatment with alglucosidase alfa. || Adult Antibodies Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Fibroblasts Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunologic Tests Male Middle Aged Muscle Strength Respiratory Function Tests Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || Clinical trials have demonstrated beneficial effects of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with alglucosidase alfa in infants, children and adults with Pompe disease. Recent studies have shown that high antibody titers can occur in patients receiving ERT and counteract the effect of treatment. This particularly occurs in those patients with classic-infantile Pompe disease that do not produce any endogenous acid α-glucosidase (CRIM-negative). It is still unclear to what extent antibody formation affects the outcome of ERT in adults with residual enzyme activity. We present the case of a patient with adult-onset Pompe disease. He was diagnosed at the age of 39years by enzymatic testing (10.7% residual activity in fibroblasts) and DNA analysis (genotype: c.-32-13T>G/p.Trp516X). Infusion-associated reactions occurred during ERT and the patient's disease progressed. Concurrently, the antibody titer rose to a similarly high level as reported for some CRIM-negative patients with classic-infantile Pompe disease. Using newly developed immunologic-assays we could calculate that approximately 40% of the administered alglucosidase alfa was captured by circulating antibodies. Further, we could demonstrate that uptake of alglucosidase alfa by cultured fibroblasts was inhibited by admixture of the patient's serum. This case demonstrates that also patients with an appreciable amount of properly folded and catalytically active endogenous acid α-glucosidase can develop antibodies against alglucosidase alfa that affect the response to ERT.",3 1
"L-alanine supplementation in late infantile glycogen storage disease type II. || Administration, Oral Alanine Cardiomyopathies Dietary Supplements Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Muscle Hypotonia Myotonic Disorders Treatment Outcome || We report a male with late infantile glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe's disease) who presented at 12 months of age with muscular hypotonia and developmental delay. Oral supplementation with L-alanine has been administered for 5 years. Progression of skeletal myopathy was slow, and cardiomyopathy resolved almost completely. L-alanine may be a valuable supplement for infants with glycogen storage disease type II.",3 1 0
"Characterization of mutations in the low density lipoprotein (LDL)-receptor gene in patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, and frequency of these mutations in FH patients in the United Kingdom. || Adolescent Adult Base Sequence Child Female Gene Deletion Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Point Mutation Receptors, LDL United Kingdom || Mutations in the gene for the low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor have been identified in 15 patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). Five patients are homozygous at the LDL-receptor locus; their mutant alleles include Glu387Lys and Pro664Leu in patients of Asian-Indian descent, Cys292Stop in a Greek Cypriot, Cys281Trp in a Turkish patient, and Gln 540Stop in a West Indian. The other 10 patients (9 of apparently British ancestry) are compound heterozygotes. Mutations have been identified in 18 of 20 possible alleles, including Glu80Lys (2 patients), Pro664Leu (3 patients), Asp69Gly, Cys176Arg, Cys227Tyr, Ser265Arg, Asp280Ala, Asp283Glu, Arg329Pro, Asp461Asn, Leu578Ser, a single bp deletion in exon 15, a 21 bp duplication of codons 200-206 and two large deletions. The seven mutations underlined above have not been described previously. The two uncharacterized mutant alleles fail to produce detectable amounts of mRNA. LDL-receptor activity in cultured cells from 13 of the 15 homozygous patients varied from undetectable to about 30% of normal, but there was no correlation between LDL-receptor activity and the untreated plasma cholesterol concentration in these patients. When genomic DNA from 295 patients with a clinical diagnosis of FH was screened for 29 mutations found in these and other FH patients of British ancestry, most were identified in only one or a few individuals. Four patients heterozygous for the Asp461Asn allele showed a wide range of clinical manifestations. These observations confirm the striking heterogeneity underlying FH in most populations and demonstrate the variability in phenotype between patients with the same mutation.",2 4 3
"Later-onset Pompe disease: early detection and early treatment initiation enabled by newborn screening. || Adolescent Adult Biopsy Cardiomyopathies Creatine Kinase Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Fibroblasts Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant, Newborn Lipids Male Middle Aged Mutation Neonatal Screening Skin alpha-Glucosidases || To determine whether newborn screening facilitates early detection and thereby early treatment initiation for later-onset Pompe disease. We have conducted a newborn screening program since 2005. Newborns with deficient skin fibroblast acid α-glucosidase activity and two acid α-glucosidase gene mutations but no cardiomyopathy were defined as having later-onset Pompe disease, and their motor development and serum creatine kinase levels were monitored every 3 to 6 months. Among 344 056 newborns, 13 (1 in 26 466) were found to have later-onset Pompe disease. During a follow-up period of up to 4 years, four patients were treated because of hypotonia, muscle weakness, delayed developmental milestones/motor skills, or elevated creatine kinase levels starting at the ages of 1.5, 14, 34, and 36 months, respectively. Muscle biopsy specimens obtained from the treated patients revealed increased storage of glycogen and lipids. Newborn screening was found to facilitate the early detection of later-onset Pompe disease. A subsequent symptomatic approach then identifies patients who need early treatment initiation.",3 1 4
"Prevalence of germline PTEN, BMPR1A, SMAD4, STK11, and ENG mutations in patients with moderate-load colorectal polyps. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Antigens, CD Bone Morphogenetic Protein Receptors, Type I Child Child, Preschool Colonic Polyps Endoglin Female Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Prospective Studies Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Receptors, Cell Surface Smad4 Protein Young Adult || Gastrointestinal polyposis is a common clinical problem, yet there is no consensus on how to best manage patients with moderate-load polyposis. Identifying genetic features of this disorder could improve management and especially surveillance of these patients. We sought to determine the prevalence of hamartomatous polyposis-associated mutations in the susceptibility genes PTEN, BMPR1A, SMAD4, ENG, and STK11 in individuals with ≥5 gastrointestinal polyps, including at least 1 hamartomatous or hyperplastic/serrated polyp. We performed a prospective, referral-based study of 603 patients (median age: 51 years; range, 2-89 years) enrolled from June 2006 through January 2012. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral lymphocytes and analyzed for specific mutations and large rearrangements in PTEN, BMPR1A, SMAD4, and STK11, as well as mutations in ENG. Recursive partitioning analysis was used to determine cutoffs for continuous variables. The prevalence of mutations was compared using Fisher's exact test. Logistic regression analyses were used to determine univariate and multivariate risk factors. Of 603 patients, 119 (20%) had a personal history of colorectal cancer and most (n = 461 [76%]) had <30 polyps. Seventy-seven patients (13%) were found to have polyposis-associated mutations, including 11 in ENG (1.8%), 13 in PTEN (2.2%), 13 in STK11 (2.2%), 20 in BMPR1A (3.3%), and 21 in SMAD4 (3.5%). Univariate clinical predictors for risk of having these mutations included age at presentation younger than 40 years (19% vs 10%; P = .008), a polyp burden of ≥30 (19% vs 11%; P = .014), and male sex (16% vs 10%; P = .03). Patients who had ≥1 ganglioneuroma (29% vs 2%; P < .001) or presented with polyps of ≥3 histologic types (20% vs 2%; P = .003) were more likely to have germline mutations in PTEN. Age younger than 40 years, male sex, and specific polyp histologies are significantly associated with risk of germline mutations in hamartomatous-polyposis associated genes. These associations could guide clinical decision making and further investigations.",3
"A frameshift mutation in exon 2 of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene linked to RFLP haplotype 1. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Chromosome Deletion DNA DNA Probes Exons Female Frameshift Mutation Genetic Linkage Haplotypes Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Pedigree Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length || A deletion of a single base in codon 55 (exon 2) of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene has been identified by direct DNA sequencing of 94 phenylketonuria (PKU) chromosomes. This mutation alters the reading frame so that a stop signal (TAA) is generated in codon 60 of the PAH gene. Haplotype analysis revealed that all PKU alleles showing the codon 55 frameshift mutation exhibited haplotype 1. In our panel of DNA probes 13% of all mutant haplotype 1 alleles carry this particular mutation. Patients who were compound heterozygotes for this deletion and R408W in exon 12, or the splice mutation in intron 12, were affected by severe PKU. Thus, the clinical data provide additional evidence that haplotype 1 PKU alleles carry molecular defects which confer a null phenotype. In addition, we were able to show that the newly detected mutation occurs on alleles of different ethnic background.",3
"Cowden Syndrome and Concomitant Pulmonary Neuroendocrine Tumor: A Presentation of Two Cases. ||  || Cowden Syndrome is a rare autosomal dominantly inherited disorder. Patients with Cowden Syndrome are at increased risk of various benign and malignant neoplasms in breast, endometrium, thyroid, gastrointestinal tract, and genitourinary system. Neuroendocrine tumors are ubiquitous neoplasms that may occur anywhere in the human body. Bronchopulmonary neuroendocrine tumors include four different histological subtypes, among these, typical and atypical pulmonary carcinoids. No association between Cowden Syndrome and neuroendocrine tumors has previously been described. We present two cases of Cowden Syndrome that were diagnosed with pulmonary carcinoids.",3
"Diagnostic dilemmas in Fabry disease: a case series study on GLA mutations of unknown clinical significance. || Adolescent Adult Aged Biopsy Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Fabry Disease Female Globosides Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Retrospective Studies Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease' (FD) phenotype is heterogeneous: alpha-galactosidase A gene mutations (GLA) can lead to classical or non-classical FD, or no FD. The aim of this study is to describe pitfalls in diagnosing non-classical FD and assess the diagnostic value of plasma globotriaosylsphingosine. This is a case series study. Family 1 (p.A143T) presented with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), absent classical FD signs, high residual alpha-galactosidase A activity (AGAL-A) and normal plasma globotriaosylsphingosine. Co-segregating sarcomeric mutations were found. Cardiac biopsy excluded FD. In family 2 (p.P60L), FD was suspected after kidney biopsy in a female with chloroquine use. Males had residual AGAL-A, no classical FD signs and minimally increased plasma globotriaosylsphingosine, indicating that p.P60L is most likely non-pathogenic. Non-specific complications and histology can be explained by chloroquine and alternative causes. Males of two unrelated families (p.R112H) show AGAL-A <5%, but slightly elevated plasma globotriaosylsphingosine (1.2-2.0 classical males >50 nmol/l). Histological evidence suggests a variable penetrance of this mutation. Patients with GLA mutations and non-specific findings such as HCM may have non-classical FD or no FD. Other (genetic) causes of FD-like findings should be excluded, including medication inducing FD-like storage. Plasma globotriaosylsphingosine may serve as a diagnostic tool, but histology of an affected organ is often mandatory.",2 4 0 3
"Novel sequence variants of the alpha-galactosidase A gene in patients with Fabry disease. || Adolescent Adult Base Sequence Fabry Disease Family Female Genetic Variation Humans Hungary Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length alpha-Galactosidase || We carried out molecular studies of 15 unrelated Hungarian families diagnosed with Fabry disease (FD). Genetic analysis of the alpha-galactosidase A gene was performed in 22 hemizygous males and 34 females. One of the female patients with severe disease phenotype showed homozygosity for the recurrent c.644A>G mutation due to parental consanguinity. The c.644A>G mutation that has previously been found mostly in patients with the cardiac variant of FD, was associated with renal but not cardiac involvement in this female and in two other family members. In nine families, eight novel sequence variants such as small deletions (c.363delT, c.477delT, c.746delAC) and single nucleotide changes (c.107T>C, c.493G>C, c.796G>T, c.866T>G, c.871G>A) were found in addition to six previously described private mutations. This report contributes to the identification of novel disease-causing mutations in FD, and increases our knowledge on demographics and molecular characteristics of this rare lysosomal storage disorder. This is the first comprehensive overview of molecular genetic features of Hungarian patients with FD.",3
"Prophylactic total gastrectomy for individuals with germline CDH1 mutation. || Adult Anastomosis, Roux-en-Y Antigens, CD Cadherins Female Gastrectomy Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Middle Aged Stomach Neoplasms || Germline mutation of the CDH1 gene, which encodes for the E-cadherin adhesion protein, is rare but confers an estimated lifetime risk of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer of 87%. Fewer than 100 prophylactic total gastrectomies have been reported for this condition. Patients with germline CDH1 mutation who underwent multidisciplinary counseling followed by prophylactic total gastrectomy were reviewed. Ten patients (6 male, 4 female) with a median age of 42 years (range, 26-51) underwent prophylactic total gastrectomy between 2006 and 2009. Of the 6 families represented, there were 4 missense, 1 frameshift, and 1 splice site mutation. Median time from genetic testing to surgery was 3 months (range, 1-7). All patients had an upper endoscopy before surgery, identifying only 1 patient with a focus of diffuse gastric cancer. After prophylactic total gastrectomy, extensive pathologic analysis demonstrated that 9 patients had up to 77 foci of noninvasive cancer, and 2 of these patients had 4-12 foci of T1 invasive cancer. Median operative time was 213 minutes; there were no anastomotic leaks, and the length of stay was 7-8 days. One patient had a complication within 30 days (pulmonary embolism), and 3 patients had late complications (2 small bowel obstructions and 1 anastomotic stricture). Median weight loss at 6 months was 19%. The majority of patients with germline CDH1 mutation have foci of noninvasive or invasive gastric cancer by middle age. Serial upper endoscopies provide inadequate screening. Prophylactic total gastrectomy is the procedure of choice for definitive treatment.",3 4
"Genetic and phenotypic aspects of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in Spain: molecular survey by regions. || Genetic Testing Genotype Humans Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Spain || We present an extensive study of the genetic diversity of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in the Spanish phenylketonuria population. We have analysed 195 PKU patients by DGGE analysis identifying 67 different mutations which represent 89% of the total mutant chromosomes. Seventeen mutations first described in Spain have not yet been detected elsewhere; ten of these are reported here for the first time. The clinical significance of this high genetic heterogeneity was examined by analysing the genotype-phenotype correlations, mainly focusing on the mild hyperphenylalaninaemia (MHP) phenotype. The genotypes found in a group of 93 MHP patients, the largest analysed so far, are described in detail, as well as the relative frequencies of the MHP mutations identified. From the total pool of mutations, 27 can be considered severe, 18 can be defined as mild and 13 as associated with MHP. The prevalent mutations correspond to one severe mutation (IVS10nt-11), one MHP mutation (A403V) and two mild mutations (165T and V388M). The high frequency of mutations with a low degree of severity can explain the relatively higher prevalence of MHP and mild PKU phenotypes in Spain compared with NOrthern European populations. We have looked at the geographical distribution in Spain of the more common mutations, finding evidence of local mutation clustering, which could be the result of differences in the ethnic background and/or of genetic drift within each region.",3 1
"Functional and Clinical Consequences of Novel α-Galactosidase A Mutations in Fabry Disease. || Adolescent Adult Amino Acid Substitution Cell Line Child Child, Preschool Databases, Genetic Enzyme Activation Fabry Disease Female Gene Expression Genetic Association Studies Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is a rare metabolic disorder of glycosphingolipid storage caused by mutations in the GLA gene encoding lysosomal hydrolase α-galactosidase A (α-gal A). Recently, the diagnostic procedure for FD has advanced in several ways, through the development of a specific biomarker (lyso-Gb3) and the implementation of newborn screenings, which acted as a catalyst to augment general awareness of the disease. Heterologous over-expression of α-gal A variants and subsequent in vitro measurement of enzyme activity provided molecular data to elucidate the relationship between mutation, enzyme damage, lyso-Gb3 biomarker levels, and clinical phenotype. This knowledge is the foundation for improved counseling with regard to prognosis and therapeutic decisions. Herein, we resume the approach of in vitro characterization, with a further 73 mainly novel GLA gene mutations. Patient lyso-Gb3 data were available for most of the mutations. All mutations were tested for responsiveness to pharmacological chaperone treatment and phenotypic data for 61 hemizygous male and 116 heterozygous female patients carrying a mutation associated with ≥ 20% residual activity, formerly classified as ""mild"" variant, were collected in order to evaluate the pathogenicity. We conclude that a mild GLA variant is typically characterized by high residual enzyme activity and normal biomarker levels. We found evidence that these variants can still be classified as a distinctive, but milder, sub-type of FD.",3 4 0
"A novel missense mutation in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene of a homozygous Pakistani patient with non-PKU hyperphenylalaninemia. || Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Base Sequence Consanguinity DNA Exons Female Homozygote Humans Infant Male Molecular Sequence Data Pedigree Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Point Mutation || ",3
"Mutations identified in exon 7 of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in Chinese. ||  || Exon 7 of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene was analyzed in 45 children affected with classic phenylketonuria (PKU) from northern China by using PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) technique and DNA direct sequencing. Six missense mutations(i.e. R243Q, R241H, G247V, L249H, F2541 and G257V) and one silent mutation (V245v) were identified. The latter three missense mutations were demonstrated as novel mutations in comparison with the PAH mutation database. One missense mutation (R241H) was first documented in Chinese. Our results showed population and region differences in the PAH mutation distribution, and suggest that there is more than one founding population for PKU in China. The finding of novel mutations will enhence the molecular diagnosis of PKU.",3
"Auditory system involvement in late onset Pompe disease: a study of 20 Italian patients. || Acoustic Impedance Tests Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Audiometry, Pure-Tone Child Cochlea Evoked Potentials, Auditory, Brain Stem Female Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Hearing Hearing Loss, Conductive Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Middle Aged alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSD II), also known as Pompe disease, is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder caused by a reduced activity of acid alpha glucosidase (GAA). Two different clinical entities have been described: rapidly fatal infantile and late onset forms. Hearing loss has been described in classic infantile Pompe patients but rarely in late onset cases. The main purpose of this study was to investigate the involvement of the auditory system in a cohort of Italian patients with late onset GSD II. We have enrolled 20 patients, 12 males and 8 females. The auditory system assessment included speech and pure tone audiometry, impedance audiometry and auditory brainstem responses (ABR). A combined interpretation of those tests allowed us to define the origin of the hearing impairment (sensorineural, conductive or mixed). Clinically, all patients but one denied subjective hearing disturbances. On the other hand, audiological evaluation revealed that 21/40 patient ears (52.5%) had a hearing impairment: 57% had a sensorineural deficit, 33% showed a conductive hearing loss whereas 10% presented with a mixed pattern. Our study revealed that, in this group of GSDII late onset patients, the auditory system impairment was more frequently present than thought with a prominent cochlear involvement. Our results emphasize the importance of a routinely auditory function evaluation in all forms of Pompe disease.",3 1
"Expressivity of hearing loss in cases with Usher syndrome type IIA. ||  || The purpose of this study was to compare the genotype/phenotype relationship between siblings with identical USH2A pathologic mutations and the consequent audiologic phenotypes, in particular degree of hearing loss (HL). Decade audiograms were also compared among two groups of affected subjects with different mutations of USH2A. DNA samples from patients with Usher syndrome type II were analysed. The audiological features of patients and affected siblings with USH2A mutations were also examined to identify genotype-phenotype correlations. Genetic and audiometric examinations were performed in 18 subjects from nine families with Usher syndrome type IIA. Three different USH2A mutations were identified in the affected subjects. Both similarities and differences of the auditory phenotype were seen in families with several affected siblings. A variable degree of hearing loss, ranging from mild to profound, was observed among affected subjects. No significant differences in hearing thresholds were found the group of affected subjects with different pathological mutations. Our results indicate that mutations in the USH2A gene and the resulting phenotype are probably modulated by other variables, such as modifying genes, epigenetics or environmental factors which may be of importance for better understanding the etiology of Usher syndrome.",2 1 3
"Long-term follow-up and outcome of phenylketonuria patients on sapropterin: a retrospective study. || Adolescent Adult Biopterin Child Child, Preschool Diet Europe Follow-Up Studies Genotype Humans Infant Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylketonurias Retrospective Studies Surveys and Questionnaires Treatment Outcome Young Adult || Sapropterin dihydrochloride, the synthetic form of 6R-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), is an approved drug for the treatment of patients with BH4-responsive phenylketonuria (PKU). The purpose of this study was to assess genotypes and data on the long-term effects of BH4/sapropterin on metabolic control and patient-related outcomes in 6 large European countries. A questionnaire was developed to assess phenotype, genotype, blood phenylalanine (Phe) levels, Phe tolerance, quality of life, mood changes, and adherence to diet in PKU patients from 16 medical centers. One hundred forty-seven patients, of whom 41.9% had mild hyperphenylalaninemia, 50.7% mild PKU, and 7.4% classic PKU, were followed up over ≤12 years. A total of 85 different genotypes were reported. With the exception of two splice variants, all of the most common mutations were reported to be associated with substantial residual Phe hydroxylase activity. Median Phe tolerance increased 3.9 times with BH4/sapropterin therapy, compared with dietary treatment, and median Phe blood concentrations were within the therapeutic range in all patients. Compared with diet alone, improvement in quality of life was reported in 49.6% of patients, improvement in adherence to diet was reported in 47% of patients, and improvement in adherence to treatment was reported in 63.3% of patients. No severe adverse events were reported. Our data document a long-term beneficial effect of orally administered BH4/sapropterin in responsive PKU patients by improving the metabolic control, increasing daily tolerance for dietary Phe intake, and for some, by improving dietary adherence and quality of life. Patient genotypes help in predicting BH4 responsiveness.",3 1
Phenylketonuria mutant alleles in different populations: missense mutation in exon 7 of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. || Base Sequence DNA Exons Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || ,3
PTEN germ-line mutations in juvenile polyposis coli. || Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Aged Genetic Variation Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Tumor Suppressor Proteins || ,3 4
"Phenylalanine hydroxylase gene mutations in the United States: report from the Maternal PKU Collaborative Study. || Alleles Base Sequence DNA Mutational Analysis DNA Primers Europe Female Gene Frequency Genetic Variation Genotype Humans Minisatellite Repeats Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias United States || The major cause of hyperphenylalaninemia is mutations in the gene encoding phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). The known mutations have been identified primarily in European patients. The purpose of this study was to determine the spectrum of mutations responsible for PAH deficiency in the United States. One hundred forty-nine patients enrolled in the Maternal PKU Collaborative Study were subjects for clinical and molecular investigations. PAH gene mutations associated with phenylketonuria (PKU) or mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP) were identified on 279 of 294 independent mutant chromosomes, a diagnostic efficiency of 95%. The spectrum is composed of 71 different mutations, including 47 missense mutations, 11 splice mutations, 5 nonsense mutations, and 8 microdeletions. Sixteen previously unreported mutations were identified. Among the novel mutations, five were found in patients with MHP, and the remainder were found in patients with PKU. The most common mutations were R408W, IVS12nt1g-->a, and Y414C, accounting for 18.7%, 7.8%, and 5.4% of the mutant chromosomes, respectively. Thirteen mutations had relative frequencies of 1%-5%, and 55 mutations each had frequencies < or = 1%. The mutational spectrum corresponded to that observed for the European ancestry of the U.S. population. To evaluate the extent of allelic variation at the PAH locus within the United States in comparison with other populations, we used allele frequencies to calculate the homozygosity for 11 populations where >90% ascertainment of mutations has been obtained. The United States was shown to contain one of the most heterogeneous populations, with homozygosity values similar to Sicily and ethnically mixed sample populations in Europe. The extent of allelic heterogeneity must be a major determining factor in the choice of mutation-detection methodology for molecular diagnosis in PAH deficiency.",3 1
"Increasing knowledge of PTEN germline mutations: Two additional patients with autism and macrocephaly. ||  || Recently, Butler et al. [2005; J Med Genet 42:318-321] reported the presence of heterozygous germline mutations in the PTEN tumor suppressor gene in three children with autism and macrocephaly. Here, we report the presence of PTEN mutations in two additional unrelated children with macrocephaly and autism. Our findings extend those of Butler et al. and suggest that PTEN gene sequencing should be included in the genetic evaluation of this subset of autistic individuals.",3
"A new insight into structural and functional impact of single-nucleotide polymorphisms in PTEN gene. || Amino Acid Sequence Databases, Factual Humans Hydrogen Bonding Molecular Dynamics Simulation Molecular Sequence Data PTEN Phosphohydrolase Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Principal Component Analysis Protein Interaction Maps Thermodynamics || Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) plays essential roles in cellular processes including survival, proliferation, energy metabolism, and cellular architecture. Activating the mutations of PTEN has long been known to produce a variety of disorders, mainly diabetes and cancer in humans. Owing to the importance of PTEN gene, a functional analysis using different in silico approaches was undertaken to explore the possible associations between genetic mutations and phenotypic variation. SIFT, PolyPhen, I-Mutant 3.0, SNP&GO, and PHD-SNP were used for initial screening of functional nsSNPs. From the observed results, three mutations R47G, H61D, and V343E were selected based on their surface accessibility and total energy change. By molecular dynamics approach, H61D showed increase in flexibility, radius of gyration, solvent accessibility, and deviated more from the native structure which was supported by the decrease in the number of hydrogen bonds. Further from principal component analysis and interaction analysis, we identified significant structural changes that can reasonably explain the involvement of deviations in stability caused by mutations. Our analysis also predicts the involvement of SNPs that could potentially influence post-translational modifications in PTEN gene. These in silico predictions could provide a new insight into structural and functional impact of PTEN polymorphisms.",3
"A novel 5' (4041insA) mutation in a patient with numerous manifestations of Cowden disease. || Family Health Female Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree || ",3
"Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in the Slovak population: genotype-phenotype correlations and genotype-based predictions of BH4-responsiveness. || Alleles Base Sequence Biopterin Chromosome Breakpoints European Continental Ancestry Group Gene Deletion Gene Frequency Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Mutation Mutation Rate Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Prognosis Slovakia Treatment Outcome || We investigated the mutation spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) in a cohort of patients from 135 Slovak PKU families. Mutational screening of the known coding region, including conventional intron splice sites, was performed using high-resolution melting analysis, with subsequent sequencing analysis of the samples showing deviated melting profiles compared to control samples. The PAH gene was also screened for deletions and duplications using MLPA analysis. Forty-eight different disease causing mutations were identified in our patient group, including 30 missense, 8 splicing, 7 nonsense, 2 large deletions and 1 small deletion with frameshift; giving a detection rate of 97.6%. The most prevalent mutation was the p.R408W, occurring in 47% of all alleles, which concurs with results from neighboring and other Slavic countries. Other frequent mutations were: p.R158Q (5.3%), IVS12+1G>A (5.3%), p.R252W (5.1%), p.R261Q (3.9%) and p.A403V (3.6%). We also identified three novel missense mutations: p.F233I, p.R270I, p.F331S and one novel variant: c.-30A>T in the proximal part of the PAH gene promoter. A spectrum of 84 different genotypes was observed and a genotype based predictions of BH4-responsiveness were assessed. Among all genotypes, 36 were predicted to be BH4-responsive represented by 51 PKU families. In addition, genotype-phenotype correlations were performed.",3 1
"Cortical dysplasia associated with the PTEN mutation in Bannayan Riley Ruvalcaba syndrome: a rare finding. || Adult Amino Acid Substitution Brain Exons Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Infant Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Malformations of Cortical Development Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase || ",2 3
"Disease Progression Modeling to Evaluate the Effects of Enzyme Replacement Therapy on Kidney Function in Adult Patients with the Classic Phenotype of Fabry Disease. || Classic phenotype Enzyme replacement therapy Fabry disease Modeling Nephropathy || Fabry disease (FD) is a rare inherited lysosomal storage disease with common and serious kidney complications. Enzyme replacement therapies (ERT) with agalsidase-α and -β were investigated to characterize their therapeutic effect on kidney function in FD patients with Classic phenotype. The prospective FD cohort consisted of 98 genetically confirmed patients (females, n = 61, males, n = 37). The median [interquartile range] follow-up time (time difference from first to last visit) was 9 [6, 12] years. The median age of ERT start was 36 [21 - 54] years for females and 39 [28 - 49] years for males. A disease progression model was developed to (i) characterize the time course of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and (ii) evaluate therapeutic effects of ERT on kidney function. Change in eGFR over time was best described by the linear model. Females had stable kidney function with and without ERT (eGFR slopes of -0.07 ml/min/1.73m^2 per year and 0.52 ml/min/1.73m^2 per year, respectively). Males with ERT showed an eGFR decrease of -3.07 ml/min/1.73m^2 per year. Mathematical disease progression modeling indicates that there is no clear therapeutic effect of ERT on kidney function in adult patients with Classic Phenotype of FD. Interpretation of these findings should take into account that the study is not randomized and lacks a placebo controlled group. Further investigations are warranted to clarify whether earlier ERT initiation before 18 years of age, higher ERT dose or more intensive therapies can preserve kidney function.",3 4
"Newborn screening for six lysosomal storage disorders in a cohort of Mexican patients: Three-year findings from a screening program in a closed Mexican health system. || Dried Blood Spot Testing Female Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Lysosomal Storage Diseases Male Mexico Neonatal Screening Sensitivity and Specificity Tandem Mass Spectrometry || To evaluate the results of a lysosomal newborn screening (NBS) program in a cohort of 20,018 Mexican patients over the course of 3years in a closed Mexican Health System (Petróleos Mexicanos [PEMEX] Health Services). Using dried blood spots (DBS), we performed a multiplex tandem mass spectrometry enzymatic assay for six lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs) including Pompe disease, Fabry disease, Gaucher disease, mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS-I), Niemann-Pick type A/B, and Krabbe disease. Screen-positive cases were confirmed using leukocyte enzymatic activity and DNA molecular analysis. From July 2012 to April 2016, 20,018 patients were screened; 20 patients were confirmed to have an LSD phenotype (99.9 in 100,000 newborns). Final distributions include 11 Pompe disease, five Fabry disease, two MPS-I, and two Niemann-Pick type A/B patients. We did not find any Gaucher or Krabbe patients. A final frequency of 1 in 1001 LSD newborn phenotypes was established. NBS is a major public health achievement that has decreased the morbidity and mortality of inborn errors of metabolism. The introduction of NBS for LSD presents new challenges. This is the first multiplex Latin-American study of six LSDs detected through NBS.",3 4
"Cleft lip, cleft palate, hereditary diffuse gastric cancer and germline mutations in CDH1. || Adenocarcinoma Adolescent Antigens, CD Biopsy Cadherins Cleft Lip Cleft Palate Female Fetal Development Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic Germ-Line Mutation Humans Stomach Neoplasms Up-Regulation || ",3
"Genotype: A Crucial but Not Unique Factor Affecting the Clinical Phenotypes in Fabry Disease. || Adult Asian Continental Ancestry Group China Codon, Nonsense Fabry Disease Female Frameshift Mutation Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Male Mutation Mutation, Missense Phenotype Sequence Analysis, DNA Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Numerous α-galactosidase A (α-gal A) gene (GLA) mutations have been identified in Fabry disease (FD), but studies on genotype-phenotype correlation are limited. This study evaluated the features of GLA gene mutations and genotype-phenotype relationship in Chinese FD patients. Gene sequencing results, demographic information, clinical history, and laboratory findings were collected from 73 Chinese FD patients. Totally 47 mutations were identified, including 23 novel mutations which might be pathogenic. For male patients, those with frameshift and nonsense mutations presented the classical FD, whereas those with missense mutations presented both of classical and atypical phenotypes. Interestingly, two male patients with missense mutation p.R356G from two unrelated families, and two with p.R301Q from one family presented different phenotypes. A statistically significant association was found between the levels of α-gal A enzyme activity and ocular changes in males, though no significant association was found between residual enzyme activity level and genotype or clinical phenotypes. For female patients, six out of seven with frameshift mutations and one out of nine with missense mutation presented the classical FD, and α-gal A activity in those patients was found to be significantly lower than that of patients with atypical phenotypes (13.73 vs. 46.32 nmol/ml/h/mg). Our findings suggest that the α-gal A activity might be associated with the clinical severity in female patients with FD. But no obvious associations between activity level of α-gal A and genotype or clinical phenotypes were found for male patients.",3 4
"Chinese hamster ovary cell-derived recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase in infantile-onset Pompe disease. || Body Height Body Weight Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Development Europe Female Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Hearing Disorders Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Infusions, Intravenous Male Muscle Hypotonia Muscle, Skeletal Respiration, Artificial Treatment Outcome United States alpha-Glucosidases || To conduct an open-label, multinational, multicenter study examining the safety and efficacy of recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase (rhGAA) in treatment of infantile-onset Pompe disease. We enrolled 8 infant patients who had Pompe disease with GAA activity <1% of normal, cardiomyopathy, and hypotonia. In the 52-week initial phase, rhGAA was infused intravenously at 10 mg/kg weekly; an extension phase continued survivors' treatment with 10 to 20 mg/kg of rhGAA weekly or 20 mg/kg every 2 weeks for as long as 153 weeks. Safety measurements included adverse events, laboratory tests, and anti-rhGAA antibody titers. Efficacy evaluations included survival, ventilator use, echocardiograms, growth, and motor and cognitive function. After 52 weeks of treatment, 6 of 8 patients were alive, and 5 patients were free of invasive ventilator support. Clinical improvements included ameliorated cardiomyopathy and improved growth and cognition. Five patients acquired new motor milestones; 3 patients walked independently. Four patients died after the initial study phase; the median age at death or treatment withdrawal for all patients was 21.7 months, significantly later than expected for patients who were not treated. Treatment was safe and well tolerated; no death was drug-related. rhGAA improved ventilator-free survival, cardiomyopathy, growth, and motor function in patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease compared with outcomes expected for patients without treatment.",3 1
"Fabry disease: 20 novel GLA mutations in 35 families. ||  || Thirty two mutations have been found in 35 unrelated patients of European origin with Fabry disease, including 8 females. Twenty of the mutations are novel and comprise of 13 missense: H46Y, W47G, R49P, C94S, F113S, G258R, P259R, Q279H, Q280H, R363H, A377D, P409A, P409T; 1 nonsense: L294X; 5 small deletions: 154delT, 520delT, 909-918del10, 1152-1153delCA, 1235-1236delCT and 1 splice site mutation: IVS5+2t-->c. The remaining 12 mutations have all been reported previously. All patients with deletions had the classic form of the disease but it was not possible to predict the phenotype from the missense mutations.",3 4
"Identification of three novel mutations in Korean phenylketonuria patients: R53H, N207D, and Y325X. ||  || ",3 1
"Cardiac response to enzyme replacement therapy in infantile Pompe disease with severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Acarbose Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Echocardiography Echocardiography, Doppler Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glucosidases Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Glycoside Hydrolase Inhibitors Humans Infant Treatment Outcome || Classic infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD), characterized by predominantly cardiac involvement, used to be considered uniformly lethal within months. The availability of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has transformed the course of the disease. Decrease in ventricular hypertrophy and improvement in ventricular function have been suggested as proof for efficacy. We report the cardiac response to ERT of a child with IOPD and severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The myocardial hypertrophy resolved. Change in ejection fraction, however, was slow. We discuss the potential benefit of other parameters beyond ejection to assess cardiac function in IOPD, including speckle tracking-based strain.",3 4
"Mutation profile of the GAA gene in 40 Italian patients with late onset glycogen storage disease type II. ||  || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII) is a recessively inherited disorder due to the deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) that results in impaired glycogen degradation and its accumulation in the lysosomes. We report here the complete molecular analysis of the GAA gene performed on 40 Italian patients with late onset GSDII. Twelve novel alleles have been identified: missense mutations were functionally characterized by enzyme activity and protein processing in a human GAA-deficient cell line while splicing mutations were studied by RT-PCR and in silico analysis. A complex allele was also identified carrying three different alterations in cis. The c.-32-13T > G was the most frequent mutation, present as compound heterozygote in 85% of the patients (allele frequency 42.3%), as described in other late onset GSDII Caucasian populations. Interestingly, the c.-32-13T > G was associated with the c.2237G > A (p.W746X) in nine of the 40 patients. Genotype-phenotype correlations are discussed with particular emphasis on the subgroup carrying the c.-32-13T > G/c.2237G > A genotype.",3 1 0
"Germline mutations in the PTEN gene in Israeli patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome and women with familial breast cancer. || Breast Neoplasms DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Israel Mutation, Missense Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phenotype Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Pigmentation Disorders Tumor Suppressor Proteins Women's Health || Germline mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 account for the majority of inherited breast cancer cases. Yet, in up to 40% of familial breast cancer cases, no mutations can be detected in either gene. Germline mutations in PTEN underlie two inherited syndromes: Cowden disease (CD) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS). The known association of CD with breast cancer risk made it plausible that germline mutations within PTEN may play a role in inherited predisposition to breast cancer. The nine coding exons of the PTEN gene were screened for harboring germline mutations using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) complemented by sequencing, in two subsets of Israeli patients: 12 patients clinically diagnosed with BRRS, and 89 women with an apparent inherited predisposition to breast cancer, some with salient features of CD. Two of three familial BRRS patients exhibited novel germline mutations in PTEN: a missense mutation changing methionine to arginine at codon 134, and insertion of two nucleotides (CA) at cDNA position 1215 resulting in a frameshift at codon 61 and a premature stop at codon 99. Among 89 high-risk women, two missense mutations were detected in exon 4: A to C change at cDNA position 1279 resulting in a change of aspargine to threonine at codon 82 (N82T), and a G to an A alteration in 1269 which alters threonine to alanine at codon 78 (T78A), a non-conservative missense mutation. This study suggests that PTEN does not play a major role in predisposing to hereditary breast cancer in Israeli women, and that detection of PTEN mutations in BRRS patients is more likely in familial cases.",3
"Autophagy in Natural History and After ERT in Glycogenosis Type II. ||  || We studied the role of autophagy in a series of 10 infantile-, juvenile-, and adult-onset GSDII patients and investigated autophagy blockade in successive biopsies of adult cases during disease natural history. We also correlated the autophagosome accumulation and efficiency of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) in four treated cases (two infantile and two juvenile-adult onsets).The autophagic flux was monitored by measuring the amount of p62-positive protein aggregates and compared, together with fibre vacuolisation, to fibre atrophy.A blocked autophagic flux resulted in p62 accumulation, increased vacuolisation, and progressive atrophy of muscle fibres in biopsies collected from patients during natural history. On the contrary, in the GSDII cases early treated with ERT, the autophagic flux improved and muscle fibre atrophy, fibre vacuolisation, and acid phosphatase activity decreased.The functionality of the autophagy-lysosome system is essential in GSDII muscle, which is characterised by the presence of swollen glycogen-filled lysosomes and autophagic build-up. Defining the role of autophagy and its relationship with muscle loss is critical for understanding the disease pathogenesis, for developing new therapies, and for improving ERT efficacy in GSDII.",3 1
"Immune dysregulation in patients with PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome: Analysis of FOXP3 regulatory T cells. || Adolescent Adult Aged Autoimmunity B-Lymphocytes Cells, Cultured Child Forkhead Transcription Factors Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Hyperplasia Immunological Synapses Lymphocyte Subsets Male Membrane Potential, Mitochondrial Middle Aged Mutation Nuclear Proteins PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoprotein Phosphatases Protein Binding Protein Transport Signal Transduction T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory Young Adult || Patients with heterozygous germline mutations in phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) experience autoimmunity and lymphoid hyperplasia. Because regulation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway is critical for maintaining regulatory T (Treg) cell functions, we investigate Treg cells in patients with heterozygous germline PTEN mutations (PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome [PHTS]). Patients with PHTS were assessed for immunologic conditions, lymphocyte subsets, forkhead box P3 (FOXP3)+ Treg cell levels, and phenotype. To determine the functional importance of phosphatases that control the PI3K pathway, we assessed Treg cell induction in vitro, mitochondrial depolarization, and recruitment of PTEN to the immunologic synapse. Autoimmunity and peripheral lymphoid hyperplasia were found in 43% of 79 patients with PHTS. Immune dysregulation in patients with PHTS included lymphopenia, CD4+ T-cell reduction, and changes in T- and B-cell subsets. Although total CD4+FOXP3+ Treg cell numbers are reduced, frequencies are maintained in the blood and intestine. Despite pathogenic PTEN mutations, the FOXP3+ T cells are phenotypically normal. We show that the phosphatase PH domain leucine-rich repeat protein phosphatase (PHLPP) downstream of PTEN is highly expressed in normal human Treg cells and provides complementary phosphatase activity. PHLPP is indispensable for the differentiation of induced Treg cells in vitro and Treg cell mitochondrial fitness. PTEN and PHLPP form a phosphatase network that is polarized at the immunologic synapse. Heterozygous loss of function of PTEN in human subjects has a significant effect on T- and B-cell immunity. Assembly of the PTEN-PHLPP phosphatase network allows coordinated phosphatase activities at the site of T-cell receptor activation, which is important for limiting PI3K hyperactivation in Treg cells despite PTEN haploinsufficiency.",3 4
"Prevalence of mutations in a panel of breast cancer susceptibility genes in BRCA1/2-negative patients with early-onset breast cancer. || Adult Breast Neoplasms Female Genes, BRCA1 Genes, BRCA2 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Penetrance Prevalence Risk Factors || Clinical testing for germ-line variation in multiple cancer susceptibility genes is available using massively parallel sequencing. Limited information is available for pretest genetic counseling regarding the spectrum of mutations and variants of uncertain significance in defined patient populations. We performed massively parallel sequencing using targeted capture of 22 cancer susceptibility genes in 278 BRCA1/2-negative patients with early-onset breast cancer (diagnosed at younger than 40 years of age). Thirty-one patients (11%) were found to have at least one deleterious or likely deleterious variant. Seven patients (2.5% overall) were found to have deleterious or likely deleterious variants in genes for which clinical guidelines exist for management, namely TP53 (4), CDKN2A (1), MSH2 (1), and MUTYH (double heterozygote). Twenty-four patients (8.6%) had deleterious or likely deleterious variants in a cancer susceptibility gene for which clinical guidelines are lacking, such as CHEK2 and ATM. Fifty-four patients (19%) had at least one variant of uncertain significance, and six patients were heterozygous for a variant in MUTYH. These data demonstrate that massively parallel sequencing identifies reportable variants in known cancer susceptibility genes in more than 30% of patients with early-onset breast cancer. However, only few patients (2.5%) have definitively actionable mutations given current clinical management guidelines.Genet Med 17 8, 630-638.",3 4
"Homozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia in Spain: Prevalence and Phenotype-Genotype Relationship. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adolescent Adult Apolipoprotein B-100 Cardiovascular Diseases Cholesterol, LDL Female Genetic Markers Genetic Predisposition to Disease Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Molecular Epidemiology Mutation Phenotype Prevalence Proprotein Convertase 9 Receptors, LDL Registries Risk Factors Spain Young Adult || Homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HoFH) is a rare disease characterized by elevated plasma levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and extremely high risk of premature atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. HoFH is caused by mutations in several genes, including LDL receptor (LDLR), apolipoprotein B (APOB), proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9), and LDL protein receptor adaptor 1 (LDLRAP1). No epidemiological studies have assessed HoFH prevalence or the clinical and molecular characteristics of this condition. Here, we aimed to characterize HoFH in Spain. Data were collected from the Spanish Dyslipidemia Registry of the Spanish Atherosclerosis Society and from all molecular diagnoses performed for familial hypercholesterolemia in Spain between 1996 and 2015 (n=16 751). Clinical data included baseline lipid levels and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease events. A total of 97 subjects were identified as having HoFH-of whom, 47 were true homozygous (1 for APOB, 5 for LDLRAP1, and 41 for LDLR), 45 compound heterozygous for LDLR, 3 double heterozygous for LDLR and PSCK9, and 2 double heterozygous for LDLR and APOB. No PSCK9 homozygous cases were identified. Two variants in LDLR were identified in 4.8% of the molecular studies. Over 50% of patients did not meet the classical HoFH diagnosis criteria. The estimated HoFH prevalence was 1:450 000. Compared with compound heterozygous cases, true homozygous cases showed more aggressive phenotypes with higher LDL-C and more atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease events. HoFH frequency in Spain was higher than expected. Clinical criteria would underestimate the actual prevalence of individuals with genetic HoFH, highlighting the importance of genetic analysis to improve familial hypercholesterolemia diagnosis accuracy.",3 4
"A previously undescribed mutation within the tetramerisation domain of TP53 in a family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. || Adult Alleles Base Sequence Codon Female Genes, p53 Genotype Humans Karyotyping Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Molecular Sequence Data Pedigree Point Mutation Sequence Analysis, DNA || We report details of a family with classic Li-Fraumeni syndrome in which there is a mutation in codon 344 of the tumour suppressor gene TP53. Codon 344 is a key residue within the tetramerisation domain, and the amino acid substitution of a proline for a leucine is predicted to have profound implications for tetramerisation and potentially DNA binding. This is the first report of a mutation at this residue in either sporadic tumours or in the germline and the first report of a germline mutation within the tetramerisation domain. The family does not appear to be remarkable in the spectrum of tumours, and there is loss of the wild-type allele in a leiomyosarcoma from the proband. A cell line has been established from the tumour of the proband and cytogenetic and molecular studies carried out, providing an extensive analysis in this family.",3 4
"Novel PTEN mutations in patients with Cowden disease: absence of clear genotype-phenotype correlations. || Female Genotype Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phenotype Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Cowden disease (CD) is characterised by multiple hamartomas in a variety of tissues. The pathological hallmark is the presence of a number of trichilemmomas. Several neurological symptoms are also part of CD with megalencephaly and Lhermitte-Duclos disease (LDD) as the most important features. Early recognition of CD patients is important because of the increased risk of developing malignancies. Breast cancer is the most frequent malignancy, but also urogenital, digestive tract, and thyroid cancers are found with higher frequencies. CD was localised to chromosome 10q23 and the PTEN gene (also known as MMAC1 or TEP1) was shown to be involved. Germline mutations were identified in both familial and sporadic CD patients. We identified eight PTEN mutations, of which seven were novel, in 13 CD patients. Combined with previous data we have identified 17 independent CD mutations. Gross DNA alterations in CD patients were not detected. Genotype-phenotype relations are discussed. The only correlation suggested to exist is that missense mutations are not detected in LDD patients. However, larger numbers are needed to confirm this. Association of PTEN mutations and the occurrence of malignant breast disease found in an earlier study cannot be confirmed. Clinical features of five CD patients without a PTEN mutation in the coding sequence do not differ from CD patients with a PTEN mutation. Furthermore, it is likely that we have identified the majority of CD patients in the Netherlands. From this we estimate that CD has a prevalence of about 1 in 250,000 in the Dutch population with a low mutation frequency.",3 4
"Screening for germ line TP53 mutations in breast cancer patients. || Adult Base Sequence Breast Neoplasms Codon Female Genes, Tumor Suppressor Humans Iceland Male Middle Aged Mutation Norway Pedigree Polymerase Chain Reaction || The constant denaturant gel electrophoresis technique was used to screen for TP53 germ line mutations in 237 women with breast carcinoma (167 unselected patients, 30 patients with at least one first-degree relative with breast cancer, and 40 women diagnosed with breast cancer before age 35). A germ line mutation at codon 181 was noted in one of the unselected patients and a codon 245 mutation in one of the early-onset patients. Both had a family history of breast cancer and other malignancies suggestive of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. The codon 245 mutation was also present in this patient's affected mother.",3
"Characteristic brain magnetic resonance imaging pattern in patients with macrocephaly and PTEN mutations. || Brain Cephalometry Child, Preschool Female Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Megalencephaly Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase || We describe an MRI phenotype seen in a series of patients with mutations in PTEN who have clinical features consistent with PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS). Retrospective review of clinical data and MRI was performed in 23 subjects evaluated in four different tertiary care centers with clinical programs in inherited disorders of the white matter. Patients were referred due to abnormal MRI features and abnormal PTEN sequencing was identified. All subjects had significant macrocephaly (on average >4 SD above the mean), developmental delay with or without autism spectrum disorder and uniform MRI features of enlarged perivascular spaces and multifocal periventricular white matter abnormalities. The phenotype of PHTS may include MRI abnormalities such as multifocal periventricular white matter abnormalities and enlarged perivascular spaces. These neuroimaging findings, in association with macrocephaly and developmental delay, should prompt consideration of PTEN as a diagnostic possibility.",3
