Abstract,Classification
"LEOPARD syndrome: clinical dilemmas in differential diagnosis of RASopathies. || Child Diagnosis, Differential Echocardiography Facies Heterozygote Humans LEOPARD Syndrome Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Middle Aged Mutation Neurofibromatoses Noonan Syndrome Phenotype Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 || Diagnosis within RASopathies still represents a challenge. Nevertheless, many efforts have been made by clinicians to identify specific clinical features which might help in differentiating one disorder from another. Here, we describe a child initially diagnosed with Neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome. The follow-up of the proband, the clinical evaluation of his father together with a gene-by-gene testing approach led us to the proper diagnosis. We report a 8-year-old male with multiple café-au-lait macules, several lentigines and dysmorphic features that suggest Noonan syndrome initially diagnosed with Neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome. However, after a few years of clinical and ophthalmological follow-up, the absence of typical features of Neurofibromatosis type 1 and the lack of NF1 mutation led us to reconsider the original diagnosis. A new examination of the patient and his similarly affected father, who was initially referred as healthy, led us to suspect LEOPARD syndrome, The diagnosis was then confirmed by the occurrence in both patients of a heterozygous mutation c.1403 C > T, p.(Thr468Met), of PTPN11. Subsequently, the proband was also found to have type-1 Arnold-Chiari malformation in association with syringomyelia. Our experience suggests that differential clinical diagnosis among RASopathies remains ambiguous and raises doubts on the current diagnostic clinical criteria. In some cases, genetic tests represent the only conclusive proof for a correct diagnosis and, consequently, for establishing individual prognosis and providing adequate follow-up. Thus, molecular testing represents an essential tool in differential diagnosis of RASophaties. This view is further strengthened by the increasing accessibility of new sequencing techniques.Finally, to our knowledge, the described case represents the third report of the occurrence of Arnold Chiari malformation and the second description of syringomyelia with LEOPARD syndrome.",2 4
"High cumulative risks of cancer in patients with PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome. || Adult Aged Breast Neoplasms Endometrial Neoplasms Female Genetic Association Studies Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Melanoma Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Risk Factors Thyroid Neoplasms || PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome (PHTS) encompasses several clinical syndromes with germline mutations in the PTEN tumour suppressor gene, including Cowden syndrome which is characterised by an increased risk of breast and thyroid cancers. Because PHTS is rare, data regarding cancer risks and genotype-phenotype correlations are limited. The objective of this study was to better define cancer risks in this syndrome with respect to the type and location of PTEN mutations. 154 PHTS individuals with a deleterious germline PTEN mutation were recruited from the activity of the Institut Bergonié genetic laboratory. Detailed phenotypic information was obtained for 146 of them. Age and sex adjusted standardised incidence ratio (SIR) calculations, cumulative cancer risk estimations, and genotype-phenotype analyses were performed. Elevated SIRs were found mainly for female breast cancer (39.1, 95% CI 24.8 to 58.6), thyroid cancer in women (43.2, 95% CI 19.7 to 82.1) and in men (199.5, 95% CI 106.39 to 342.03), melanoma in women (28.3, 95% CI 7.6 to 35.4) and in men (39.4, 95% CI 10.6 to 100.9), and endometrial cancer (48.7, 95% CI 9.8 to 142.3). Cumulative cancer risks at age 70 were 85% (95% CI 70% to 95%) for any cancer, 77% (95% CI 59% to 91%) for female breast cancer, and 38% (95% CI 25% to 56%) for thyroid cancer. The risk of cancer was two times greater in women with PHTS than in men with PHTS (p<0.05). This study shows a considerably high cumulative risk of cancer for patients with PHTS, mainly in women without clear genotype-phenotype correlation for this cancer risk. New recommendations for the management of PHTS patients are proposed.",2 4 3
"Long-chain L 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency does not appear to be the primary cause of lipid myopathy in patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS). ||  || In order to test the hypothesis that long-chain L 3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency is associated with the lipid myopathy and muscle carnitine deficiency observed in Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS), we studied the enzyme activity in cultured skin fibroblasts from three generations of a family with a clear dominant inheritance of BRRS. Enzyme activities were normal while the germline PTEN missense mutation P246L segregated with BRRS in this family. No PTEN mutations were identified in the original patient with BRRS and LCHAD deficiency. These data suggest that the previously reported case of LCHAD and BRRS either represents the coincidental concurrence of two rare genetic events or that a gene other than PTEN is related to LCHAD and BRRS.",2 3
"Coronary microvascular dysfunction is an early feature of cardiac involvement in patients with Anderson-Fabry disease. || Coronary microvascular dysfunction Early phenotype Fabry disease PET || Male patients with Anderson-Fabry disease (AFD) often exhibit cardiac involvement, characterized by LV hypertrophy (LVH), associated with severe coronary microvascular dysfunction (CMD). Whether CMD is present in patients without LVH, particularly when female, remains unresolved. The aim of the study was to investigate the presence of CMD by positron emission tomography (PET) in AFD patients of both genders, with and without evidence of LVH. We assessed myocardial blood flow following dipyridamole infusion (Dip-MBF) with 13N-labelled ammonia by PET in 30 AFD patients (age 51 ± 13 years; 18 females) and in 24 healthy controls. LVH was defined as echocardiographic maximal LV wall thickness ≥13 mm. LVH was present in 67% of patients (n = 20; 10 males and 10 females). Dip-MBF was reduced in all patients compared with controls (1.8 ± 0.5 and 3.2 ± 0.5 mL/min/g, respectively, P < 0.001). For both genders, flow impairment was most severe in patients with LVH (1.4 ± 0.5 mL/min/g in males and 1.9 ± 0.5 mL/min/g in females), but was also evident in those without LVH (1.8 ± 0.3 mL/min/g in males and 2.1 ± 0.4 mL/min/g in females; overall P = 0.064 vs. patients with LVH). Analysis of variance (ANOVA) for the 17 LV segments showed marked regional heterogeneity of MBF in AFD (F = 4.46, P < 0.01), with prevalent hypoperfusion of the apical region. Conversely, controls showed homogeneous LV perfusion (F = 1.25, P = 0.23). Coronary microvascular function is markedly impaired in AFD patients irrespective of LVH and gender. CMD may represent the only sign of cardiac involvement in AFD patients, with potentially important implications for clinical management.",2
"Mutation spectrum of six genes in Chinese phenylketonuria patients obtained through next-generation sequencing. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Biopterin China Computational Biology DNA Mutational Analysis High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans INDEL Mutation Multiplex Polymerase Chain Reaction Mutation Pedigree Phenylketonurias || The identification of gene variants plays an important role in the diagnosis of genetic diseases. To develop a rapid method for the diagnosis of phenylketonuria (PKU) and tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) deficiency, we designed a multiplex, PCR-based primer panel to amplify all the exons and flanking regions (50 bp average) of six PKU-associated genes (PAH, PTS, GCH1, QDPR, PCBD1 and GFRP). The Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM) System was used to detect mutations in all the exons of these six genes. We tested 93 DNA samples from blood specimens from 35 patients and their parents (32 families) and 26 healthy adults. Using strict bioinformatic criteria, this sequencing data provided, on average, 99.14% coverage of the 39 exons at more than 70-fold mean depth of coverage. We found 23 previously documented variants in the PAH gene and six novel mutations in the PAH and PTS genes. A detailed analysis of the mutation spectrum of these patients is described in this study. These results were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. In conclusion, benchtop next-generation sequencing technology can be used to detect mutations in monogenic diseases and can detect both point mutations and indels with high sensitivity, fidelity and throughput at a lower cost than conventional methods in clinical applications.",2 1 3
