Abstract,Classification
"Missense mutations in the PCSK9 gene are associated with hypocholesterolemia and possibly increased response to statin therapy. || Adult Alleles Cholesterol, LDL Dyslipidemias Female Haplotypes Humans Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Reductase Inhibitors Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Receptors, LDL Serine Endopeptidases || The proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) gene encodes a proprotein convertase that causes degradation of cell surface low-density lipoprotein receptors (LDLRs). Mutations in the PCSK9 gene that disrupt the normal function of PCSK9 could therefore result in increased number of LDLRs and hypocholesterolemia. Also, the cholesterol-lowering effect of statins could be increased in subjects carrying mutations in the PCSK9 gene. We have screened 38 unrelated hypocholesterolemic subjects as well as 25 unrelated familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) heterozygotes who responded particularly well to statin therapy for mutations in the 12 exons of the PCSK9 gene by DNA sequencing. Six of the 38 (15.8%) hypocholesterolemic subjects were heterozygous for 1 of the 3 mutations R46L, G106R, or R237W in the PCSK9 gene. In the group of 25 FH heterozygotes who responded particularly well to statin therapy, 3 (8.8%) were heterozygous for mutations R46L or N157K in the PCSK9 gene. None of 441 hypercholesterolemic subjects without mutations in the LDLR gene or in the apolipoprotein B-100 gene possessed any of the 4 mutations. The 4 missense mutations R46L, G106R, N157K, and R237W are associated with hypocholesterolemia and possibly increased response to statin therapy.",2 4
"A PTPN11 gene mutation (Y63C) causing Noonan syndrome is not associated with short stature in general population. || Adult Base Sequence Codon DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Female Gene Frequency Genes, Dominant Genetic Variation Heterozygote Humans Introns Japan Male Middle Aged Mutation Noonan Syndrome Pedigree Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases src Homology Domains || Human growth is a highly complicated process, but it is obviously influenced by a genetic factor. Recent genome-wide linkage analyses suggested some genetic regions underlying stature variations. However, any specific genes underlying stature variations have not been identified. Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder clinically characterized by short stature, minor facial anomalies, and congenital heart defects. Recently, PTPN11 (protein-tyrosine phosphatase, nonreceptor-type 11) has been identified as a major responsible gene for NS, causing about half of the affected individuals. We herein report a large family demonstrating NS caused by one of the common PTPN11 mutations, c.188 A > G (Y63C). In this family, the patients were apparently healthy, but heterozygosity of the c.188 A > G (Y63C) mutation was related to growth impairment. This finding suggested that PTPN11 genetic variants contribute to adult height in the general population. However, c.188 A > G (Y63C) was not identified in 96 short individuals from the general population of 2,281 healthy adults. Thus, it is unlikely that PTPN11 is one of the genes underlying stature variations in the general population.",2
"Mutations in exon 3 of the PAH gene causing mild hyperphenylalaninemia. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Female Genotype Humans Infant Male Mutation, Missense Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias || Phenylketonuria (PKU), an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), is clinically very heterogeneous. On molecular level more than 350 mutations in the PAH gene are known to date, which in different genotype combinations could account for biochemical and clinical variability. Mutations located in exon 3 coding for a part of the regulatory domain of the PAH enzyme cause classical PKU, mild PKU, and mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP). We describe the phenotypic effects of seven mutations in exon 3 of the PAH gene (R68G, R68S, R71H, S87R, P89S, I95F, and A104D). We propose that mutations located between amino acid positions 71 through 94 cause MHP.",2 1 3
"The spectrum and evolution of phenotypic findings in PTEN mutation positive cases of Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome. || Abnormalities, Multiple Craniofacial Abnormalities Family Health Female Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phenotype Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Proteins || ",2 3
"Germline mutations in PTEN are present in Bannayan-Zonana syndrome. || Animals Base Sequence Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10 DNA Genes, Tumor Suppressor Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Molecular Sequence Data PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoprotein Phosphatases Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Tumor Suppressor Proteins || ",2 3
"Mutation of an A-kinase-anchoring protein causes long-QT syndrome. || A Kinase Anchor Proteins Adolescent Adult Aged Binding Sites Child Child, Preschool Cytoskeletal Proteins DNA Mutational Analysis Female Humans Infant KCNQ1 Potassium Channel Long QT Syndrome Male Middle Aged Mutation Potassium Channels Protein Structure, Tertiary Receptors, Adrenergic, beta || A-kinase anchoring proteins (AKAPs) recruit signaling molecules and present them to downstream targets to achieve efficient spatial and temporal control of their phosphorylation state. In the heart, sympathetic nervous system (SNS) regulation of cardiac action potential duration (APD), mediated by beta-adrenergic receptor (betaAR) activation, requires assembly of AKAP9 (Yotiao) with the I(Ks) potassium channel alpha subunit (KCNQ1). KCNQ1 mutations that disrupt this complex cause type 1 long-QT syndrome (LQT1), one of the potentially lethal heritable arrhythmia syndromes. Here, we report identification of (i) regions on Yotiao critical to its binding to KCNQ1 and (ii) a single putative LQTS-causing mutation (S1570L) in AKAP9 (Yotiao) localized to the KCNQ1 binding domain in 1/50 (2%) subjects with a clinically robust phenotype for LQTS but absent in 1,320 reference alleles. The inherited S1570L mutation reduces the interaction between KCNQ1 and Yotiao, reduces the cAMP-induced phosphorylation of the channel, eliminates the functional response of the I(Ks) channel to cAMP, and prolongs the action potential in a computational model of the ventricular cardiocyte. These reconstituted cellular consequences of the inherited S1570L-Yotiao mutation are consistent with delayed repolarization of the ventricular action potential observed in the affected siblings. Thus, we have demonstrated a link between genetic perturbations in AKAP and human disease in general and AKAP9 and LQTS in particular.",2 0
"Obesity and eating behaviour in a three-generation Chilean family with carriers of the Thrl50Ile mutation in the melanocortin-4 receptor gene. || Adult Aged Body Composition Body Mass Index Child Chile Family Characteristics Feeding Behavior Female Gene Frequency Heterozygote Humans Isoleucine Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Obesity Pedigree Penetrance Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Threonine || It has been proposed that functional mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) gene have an important impact in body mass index, being considered as a major susceptibility gene for obesity. A number of mutations have been reported in the MC4R gene in subjects from different countries and ethnic groups. However, no reports of MC4R mutations are have been published for South American populations. In this study, DNA samples of thirty-two unrelated obese women of Chilean origin were examined to search for genetic variants in the single exon of the gene through the use of single strand conformational polymorphism techniques and direct sequencing, leading to the identification of a Thr150Ile mutation in heterozygous status. The evaluation of family relatives of the index case for this mutation using PCR-RFLP analysis, identified two additional carriers in a three-generation family. Obesity, eating behavior and body composition phenotypes in this family revealed a possible relation of this variant with obesity in the presence of reduced penetrance. According to our knowledge, this is the first report of MC4R mutations in South American populations.",2 4
"One third of Danish hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients with MYH7 mutations have mutations [corrected] in MYH7 rod region. || Amino Acid Substitution Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Denmark Female Humans Male Myosin Heavy Chains Point Mutation Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Ventricular Myosins || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) is, in most cases, a disease of the sarcomere, caused by a mutation in one of 10 known sarcomere disease genes. More than 266 mutations have been identified since 1989. The FHC disease gene first characterized MYH7, encodes the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain, and contains more than 115 of these mutations. However, in most studies, only the region encoding the globular head and the hinge region of the mature cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain have been investigated. Furthermore, most studies carries out screening for mutations in the most prevalent disease genes, and discontinues screening when an apparent disease-associated mutation has been identified. The aim of the present study was to screen for mutations in the rod region of the MYH7 gene in all probands of the cohort, regardless of the known genetic status of the proband. Three disease-causing mutations were identified in the rod region in four probands using capillary electrophoresis single-strand conformation polymorphism as a screening method. All mutations were novel: N1327K, R1712W, and E1753K. Two of the probands had already been shown to carry other FHC-associated mutations. In conclusion, we show that in the Danish cohort we find one third of all MYH7 mutations in the rod-encoding region and we find that two of the patients carrying these mutations also carry mutations in other FHC disease genes stressing the need for a complete screening of all known disease genes in FHC-patients.",2 4
"Germ line p53 mutations in a familial syndrome of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other neoplasms. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Breast Neoplasms Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17 Cloning, Molecular Codon DNA Deoxyribonucleases, Type II Site-Specific Genes, p53 Genetic Testing Germ Cells Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary Pedigree Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Repetitive Sequences, Nucleic Acid Sarcoma Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Familial cancer syndromes have helped to define the role of tumor suppressor genes in the development of cancer. The dominantly inherited Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is of particular interest because of the diversity of childhood and adult tumors that occur in affected individuals. The rarity and high mortality of LFS precluded formal linkage analysis. The alternative approach was to select the most plausible candidate gene. The tumor suppressor gene, p53, was studied because of previous indications that this gene is inactivated in the sporadic (nonfamilial) forms of most cancers that are associated with LFS. Germ line p53 mutations have been detected in all five LFS families analyzed. These mutations do not produce amounts of mutant p53 protein expected to exert a trans-dominant loss of function effect on wild-type p53 protein. The frequency of germ line p53 mutations can now be examined in additional families with LFS, and in other cancer patients and families with clinical features that might be attributed to the mutation.",2
"Male breast cancer in Cowden syndrome patients with germline PTEN mutations. || Adult Aged Breast Neoplasms Breast Neoplasms, Male DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Family Health Fatal Outcome Female Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Cowden syndrome (CS) (OMIM 158350) is a multiple hamartoma syndrome associated with germline mutations in the PTEN tumour suppressor gene. While CS is characterised most commonly by non-cancerous lesions (mucocutaneous trichilemmomas, acral and palmoplantar keratoses, and papillomatous papules), it is also associated with an increased susceptibility to breast cancer (in females) and thyroid cancer, as well as non-cancerous conditions of the breast and thyroid. Here we report two cases of male breast cancer occurring in patients with classical CS phenotypes and germline PTEN mutations. The first subject was diagnosed with CS indicated primarily by mucocutaneous papillomatosis, facial trichilemmomas, and macrocephaly with frontal bossing at the age of 31 years. He developed breast cancer at 41 years and subsequently died of the disease. A PTEN mutation, c.802delG, was identified in this subject, yet none of his family members showed evidence of a CS phenotype, suggesting that this PTEN mutation may be a de novo occurrence. The second subject had a CS phenotype including multiple trichilemmomas and thyroid adenoma, developed male breast cancer at 43 years, and died of the disease at 57 years. He was a carrier of a PTEN mutation c.347-351delACAAT that cosegregated with the CS phenotype in affected family members. These two cases of male breast cancer associated with germline PTEN mutations and the CS phenotype suggest that CS may be associated with an increased risk of early onset male as well as female breast cancer.",2 4 3
"The electrocardiogram is a more sensitive indicator than echocardiography of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in families with a mutation in the MYH7 gene. || Adult Aged Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier State Child DNA Mutational Analysis DNA Primers Echocardiography Electrocardiography Female Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Myosins Pedigree Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction || Mutations in the cardiac beta myosin heavy chain gene causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy have been identified, and to assist both diagnosis and prediction of outcome attempts have been made to correlate phenotype and genotype. Two new mutations in codon 403 of the gene in three unrelated families are described and attention drawn to variable or even absent phenotypic expression in different family members. The polymerase chain reaction and heteroduplex analysis on Mutation Detection Enhancement gels were used to search for mutations in the globular head of the beta myosin heavy chain gene in families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Two mutations were found in exon 13 (codon 403) of the gene. In two unrelated Polish families the mutation resulted in the conversion of arginine to tryptophan (CGG: >TGG). A second mutation, found in a British family, converted the same arginine to leucine (CGG: >CTG). These mutations were detected in family members who had electrocardiographic and echocardiographic features typical of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; however, they were also detected in 7 other adult relatives with an abnormal electrocardiogram but a normal echocardiogram. Two unrelated adult relatives had completely normal clinical findings but carried the gene mutation. Identification of a specific mutation gives no guide to the clinical phenotype. There is considerable variability in the phenotypic expression of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Mutations were detected in adults previously regarded as normal or in whom the diagnosis was questionable. The fact that the clinical significance of the mutation in these people is still unknown emphasises the dilemma facing screening programmes. Isolated, unexplained electrocardiographic abnormalities in first degree relatives in a family with a definitive diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy should be regarded as evidence of a carrier state.",2 4
"Targeted Screening of Fabry Disease in Male Hemodialysis Patients in Brazil Highlights Importance of Family Screening. ||  || Fabry disease (FD) is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by enzyme α galactosidase A (α-Gal A) deficiency due to mutations in the galactosidase alpha (GLA) gene. It leads to damage several organs, such as the kidneys, due to progressive accumulation of glycosphingolipids. To estimate the prevalence of FD among male hemodialysis (HD) patients in a northern state of Brazil. Screening was performed using a dried blood spot on filter paper to identify patients with low α-Gal A enzyme activity (≤2.2 µmol/l/h). Those with low enzyme activity underwent genetic analysis of the GLA gene. Family screening was conducted in the index cases. 2,583 male HD patients (age: 52 (18-91 years)) were screened. The α-Gal A assay identified 72 males (2.78%) with low enzyme activity. Genotyping identified 3 patients with GLA mutations: W204X, A368T, both previously reported; and C52F, a novel missense mutation. Only the patient with W204X mutation had classic FD. The prevalence rate was 0.12%. Family screening of the index cases identified 23 family members with the same mutations. The prevalence of FD amongst male HD patients found in the Northern of Brazil was low (0.12%). However, family screening of the 3 index cases identified family members at an early stage of the disease, which may benefit from earlier treatment.",2 4 0
"Mutations in sarcomere protein genes as a cause of dilated cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Amino Acid Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Dilated Child Child, Preschool Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 Female Genes, Dominant Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense Myocardial Contraction Myocardium Myosin Heavy Chains Nonmuscle Myosin Type IIB Pedigree Sarcomeres Troponin T Ultrasonography || The molecular basis of idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy, a primary myocardial disorder that results in reduced contractile function, is largely unknown. Some cases of familial dilated cardiomyopathy are caused by mutations in cardiac cytoskeletal proteins; this finding implicates defects in contractile-force transmission as one mechanism underlying this disorder. To elucidate this important cause of heart failure, we investigated other genetic causes of dilated cardiomyopathy. Clinical evaluations were performed in 21 kindreds with familial dilated cardiomyopathy. A genome-wide linkage study prompted a search of the genes encoding beta-myosin heavy chain, troponin T, troponin I, and alpha-tropomyosin for disease-causing mutations. A genetic locus for mutations associated with dilated cardiomyopathy was identified at chromosome 14q11.2-13 (maximal lod score, 5.11; theta=0), where the gene for cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain is encoded. Analyses of this and other genes for sarcomere proteins identified disease-causing dominant mutations in four kindreds. Cardiac beta-myosin heavy-chain missense mutations (Ser532Pro and Phe764Leu) and a deletion in cardiac troponin T (deltaLys210) caused early-onset ventricular dilatation (average age at diagnosis, 24 years) and diminished contractile function and frequently resulted in heart failure. Affected persons had neither antecedent cardiac hypertrophy (average maximal left-ventricular-wall thickness, 8.5 mm) nor histopathological findings characteristic of hypertrophy. Mutations in sarcomere protein genes account for approximately 10 percent of cases of familial dilated cardiomyopathy and are particularly prevalent in families with early-onset ventricular dilatation and dysfunction. Because distinct mutations in sarcomere proteins cause either dilated or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the effects of mutant sarcomere proteins on muscle mechanics must trigger two different series of events that remodel the heart.",2 4
"Targeted sequencing identifies novel variants involved in autosomal recessive hereditary hearing loss in Qatari families. || Adolescent Alleles Cadherins Child Child, Preschool Connexins Female GPI-Linked Proteins Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Infant Male Membrane Proteins Models, Molecular Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Protein Conformation Qatar Sequence Analysis, DNA || Hereditary hearing loss is characterized by a very high genetic heterogeneity. In the Qatari population the role of GJB2, the worldwide HHL major player, seems to be quite limited compared to Caucasian populations. In this study we analysed 18 Qatari families affected by non-syndromic hearing loss using a targeted sequencing approach that allowed us to analyse 81 genes simultaneously. Thanks to this approach, 50% of these families (9 out of 18) resulted positive for the presence of likely causative alleles in 6 different genes: CDH23, MYO6, GJB6, OTOF, TMC1 and OTOA. In particular, 4 novel alleles were detected while the remaining ones were already described to be associated to HHL in other ethnic groups. Molecular modelling has been used to further investigate the role of novel alleles identified in CDH23 and TMC1 genes demonstrating their crucial role in Ca2+ binding and therefore possible functional role in proteins. Present study showed that an accurate molecular diagnosis based on next generation sequencing technologies might largely improve molecular diagnostics outcome leading to benefits for both genetic counseling and definition of recurrence risk.",2
"Two novel mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene associated with dilated cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Arginine Blood Pressure Cardiomyopathy, Dilated Child Female Finland Follow-Up Studies Genetic Predisposition to Disease Glutamine Heart Failure Humans Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular Male Middle Aged Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Sarcomeres Stroke Volume Tropomyosin Troponin C Troponin I Troponin T Tryptophan Ventricular Myosins || Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is familial in approximately 20-35% of cases of idiopathic DCM. Several mutations in the different sarcomere protein genes have been reported to cause DCM. We wanted to investigate the role of sarcomere protein gene variants in Finnish DCM patients. We screened all coding exons of five sarcomere protein genes (beta-myosin heavy chain, alpha-tropomyosin, troponin C, troponin I and troponin T) in a well-characterized population of 52 DCM patients in Eastern Finland by the PCR-SSCP and sequencing method. Two novel mutations, Arg1053Gln and Arg1500Trp, in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene in two index patients were detected. The proband with the Arg1053Gln mutation had a dilated left ventricle and impaired systolic function, but other family members carrying this mutation presented with septal hypertrophy. It thus seems that the Arg1053Gln mutation is primarily a HCM mutation, which can also lead to DCM. The other mutation, Arg1500Trp, was associated with a typical DCM phenotype. The Arg1500Trp mutation carrier had only one family member alive, but she did not carry the mutation and, therefore, cosegregation of the mutation and the disease in this family could not be reliably verified. No disease-causing mutations were found in the other sarcomere protein genes. Two novel mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene were detected in patients with DCM. Overall, mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene seem to be relatively uncommon in Finnish DCM patients.",2 4
"USH2A mutation analysis in 70 Dutch families with Usher syndrome type II. ||  || Usher syndrome type II (USH2) is characterised by moderate to severe high-frequency hearing impairment, progressive visual loss due to retinitis pigmentosa and intact vestibular responses. Three loci are known for USH2, however, only the gene for USH2a (USH2A) has been identified. Mutation analysis of USH2A was performed in 70 Dutch USH2 families. Ten mutations in USH2A were detected, of which three are novel, c.949C>A, c.2242C>T (p.Gln748X) and c.4405C>T (p.Gln1468X). Including 9 previously published Dutch USH2a families, estimates of the prevalence of USH2a in the Dutch USH2 population were made. Mutations were identified in 62% of the families. In 28% both mutated alleles were identified, whereas in 34% the mutation in only one allele was found. It is estimated that about 28% of the Dutch USH2 families have a different causative gene. Analysis of deduced haplotypes suggests that c.1256G>T (p.Cys419Phe) is a Dutch ancestral mutation, occurring in 16% of the alleles.",2 1 3
"Malignant familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in a family with a 453Arg-->Cys mutation in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene: coexistence of sudden death and end-stage heart failure. || Adolescent Adult Amino Acid Sequence Arginine Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic China Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 Cysteine DNA Primers Death, Sudden Family Female Genetic Linkage Heart Failure Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Prognosis Survival Analysis || Recent genotype-phenotype correlation studies in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) have revealed that some mutations in the beta- myosin heavy chain (BMHC) gene may be associated with a high incidence of sudden death and a poor prognosis. Coexistence of sudden death and end-stage heart failure in several families with FHC has recently being reported; however, the genetic basis of such families has not been clearly demonstrated. A three-generation Chinese familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) family (family HLI) with two cases of end-stage heart failure and three cases of sudden death was analyzed. The average age of death in the affected members in this family was 34 years old. Genetic linkage analysis using polymorphisms in the (alpha- and beta-myosin heavy chain genes revealed that FHC in this family is significantly linked to the BMHC gene without recombinations. Single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis of exons 8, 9 and 13 to 23 in the BMHC gene showed a polymorphic band on exon 14 that is in complete linkage with the disease status in this family. DNA sequencing analysis in the affected members revealed an 453Arg-->Cys mutation in the BMHC gene. To our knowledge this is the first reported mutation of FHC in Chinese. Our data suggest that the 453Arg-->Cys mutation is associated with a malignant clinical course in FHC due not only to sudden death but also to end-stage heart failure.",2 4
"CLN6 disease caused by the same mutation originating in Pakistan has varying pathology. || Blood Vessels Child Humans Lymphocytes Male Membrane Proteins Mutation Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses Pakistan || The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs), the most common neurodegenerative diseases in children, are characterised by storage of autofluorescent material that has a characteristic ultrastructure. We report two families with variant late infantile NCL, both originating from Pakistan. Probands from both families were homozygous for the same mutation (c.316dupC) but had variable pathology to that currently thought to be typical for CLN6 disease, late infantile variant. The observed pathology of one proband resembled condensed fingerprints, previously described in late infantile CLN7 and CLN8 diseases, and pathology from the second proband was thought to be absent even after repeated skin biopsy, but observed after review. This mutation is the most common NCL mutation in families originating from Pakistan and could be prioritised for testing. Finally, this report contains the first prenatal diagnosis for late infantile CLN6 disease, initially made on the basis of EM and now confirmed by mutation analysis.",2
"Haploinsufficiency of CBFA2 causes familial thrombocytopenia with propensity to develop acute myelogenous leukaemia. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Blood Platelets Chromosome Mapping Colony-Forming Units Assay Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA Mutational Analysis DNA-Binding Proteins Family Health Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Hematopoiesis Heterozygote Humans In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute Male Megakaryocytes Microsatellite Repeats Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Proto-Oncogene Proteins RNA Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Sequence Deletion Sequence Homology, Amino Acid Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid Thrombocytopenia Transcription Factors || Familial platelet disorder with predisposition to acute myelogenous leukaemia (FPD/AML, MIM 601399) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by qualitative and quantitative platelet defects, and propensity to develop acute myelogenous leukaemia (AML). Informative recombination events in 6 FPD/AML pedigrees with evidence of linkage to markers on chromosome 21q identified an 880-kb interval containing the disease gene. Mutational analysis of regional candidate genes showed nonsense mutations or intragenic deletion of one allele of the haematopoietic transcription factor CBFA2 (formerly AML1) that co-segregated with the disease in four FPD/AML pedigrees. We identified heterozygous CBFA2 missense mutations that co-segregated with the disease in the remaining two FPD/AML pedigrees at phylogenetically conserved amino acids R166 and R201, respectively. Analysis of bone marrow or peripheral blood cells from affected FPD/AML individuals showed a decrement in megakaryocyte colony formation, demonstrating that CBFA2 dosage affects megakaryopoiesis. Our findings support a model for FPD/AML in which haploinsufficiency of CBFA2 causes an autosomal dominant congenital platelet defect and predisposes to the acquisition of additional mutations that cause leukaemia.",2 4
"Clinical and prognostic evaluation of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in two South African families with different cardiac beta myosin heavy chain gene mutations. || Adolescent Adult Aged Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Child, Preschool Female Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Myosins Pedigree Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational South Africa || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most common inherited cardiac disorder, with sudden cardiac death at a young age the most frequent cause of death in affected individuals. Some cases of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are caused by missense mutations of the beta myosin heavy chain (beta MHC) gene on chromosome 14 and at least 17 such mutations have been described. Recent reports suggest that a correlation exists between a specific beta MHC gene mutation and prognosis in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This premise is currently being used as a basis to provide counselling for affected families. This mutation/prognosis association, however, has not been widely assessed as yet. The clinical and prognostic features of two South African families of mixed racial descent, in which different beta MHC gene mutations were segregating, were studied to evaluate this correlation. The results were compared with those of previously published reports of European families carrying the same mutations. The beta MHC gene missense mutations in two affected families were identified by single strand conformation polymorphism analysis and sequencing (pedigree 106: Arg403Trp; pedigree 108: Arg249Gln). All family members were subjected to genotypic analysis using polymerase chain reaction amplification and restriction enzyme based mutation detection techniques. Clinical, electrocardiographic, and echocardiographic studies were performed on genotypically affected individuals in these two kindreds. The number of individuals identified in pedigree 106 with the Arg403Trp mutation was 32.10 individuals bore the Arg249Gln mutation in pedigree 108. The penetrance rate in adults (equal to or greater than 16 years), using the strict echocardiographic criterion of maximum left ventricular wall thickness > or = 13 mm, was 25% for pedigree 106 and 33% for pedigree 108. Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy compatible electrocardiographic and echocardiographic abnormalities were seen in 60% of genotypically positive individuals aged > or = 16 years in pedigree 106 and 80% in pedigree 108. The prognosis was uniformly benign in the two families. For pedigree 106 this corresponded to a report of no early sudden cardiac deaths in a French family with the Arg403Trp mutation. For pedigree 108 the absence of such deaths was in apparent contrast to the four cases reported in 24 genotypically affected individuals in a study of a kindred of European ancestry bearing the Arg249Gln mutation. This study of a large South African kindred confirmed the benign nature of the Arg403Trp mutation suggested in a previous report. The number and the relatively young age of affected individuals in a second South African family must be considered when comparing the absence of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated deaths with the intermediate survival reported for the Arg249Gln mutation in a European family. This investigation lends support to current evidence relating specific beta MHC gene mutations to prognosis, which may be used as a basis to provide counselling for affected families.",2 4
"A homozygous missense mutation in the ciliary gene TTC21B causes familial FSGS. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adolescent Adult Animals Cell Line, Transformed Child Cilia Family Health Female Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental Haplotypes Homozygote Humans Male Mice Microtubule-Associated Proteins Mutation, Missense Pedigree Phenotype Podocytes Stress Fibers Young Adult || Several genes, mainly involved in podocyte cytoskeleton regulation, have been implicated in familial forms of primary FSGS. We identified a homozygous missense mutation (p.P209L) in the TTC21B gene in seven families with FSGS. Mutations in this ciliary gene were previously reported to cause nephronophthisis, a chronic tubulointerstitial nephropathy. Notably, tubular basement membrane thickening reminiscent of that observed in nephronophthisis was present in patients with FSGS and the p.P209L mutation. We demonstrated that the TTC21B gene product IFT139, an intraflagellar transport-A component, mainly localizes at the base of the primary cilium in developing podocytes from human fetal tissue and in undifferentiated cultured podocytes. In contrast, in nonciliated adult podocytes and differentiated cultured cells, IFT139 relocalized along the extended microtubule network. We further showed that knockdown of IFT139 in podocytes leads to primary cilia defects, abnormal cell migration, and cytoskeleton alterations, which can be partially rescued by p.P209L overexpression, indicating its hypomorphic effect. Our results demonstrate the involvement of a ciliary gene in a glomerular disorder and point to a critical function of IFT139 in podocytes. Altogether, these data suggest that this homozygous TTC21B p.P209L mutation leads to a novel hereditary kidney disorder with both glomerular and tubulointerstitial damages.",2 0
"Characteristics and prognostic implications of myosin missense mutations in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Amino Acid Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Humans Mutation Myosins Prognosis || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is characterized by a variable degree of myocardial hypertrophy and a wide range of symptoms. Different mutations in the beta cardiac myosin heavy-chain gene have been identified in three affected families. However, neither the proportion of cases attributable to myosin mutations nor the effects of different mutations on clinical outcome are known. Using a ribonuclease protection assay, we screened the beta cardiac myosin heavy-chain genes of probands from 25 unrelated families with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; this assay is a sensitive method for detecting the presence and location of mutations. We further defined the mutations by analyzing their nucleotide sequences. The clinical features of the disease were compared in families with various myosin mutations. Seven mutations in the beta cardiac myosin heavy-chain gene were identified in 12 of the 25 families. All were missense mutations (i.e., causing the substitution of a single amino acid) clustered in the head and head-rod junction regions of the molecule. Six mutations resulted in a change in the charge of the amino acid. Patients with mutations that changed the charge of the altered amino acid (such as that from arginine to glutamine at nucleotide 403 or from arginine to cysteine at nucleotide 453) had a significantly shorter life expectancy (mean age at death, 33 years), whereas patients with the one mutation that did not produce a change in charge (Val606Met) had nearly normal survival. However, patients with different mutations did not differ appreciably in their clinical manifestations of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Different missense mutations in the beta cardiac myosin heavy-chain gene can be identified in approximately 50 percent of families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. In those families, a definite genetic diagnosis can be made in all members. Since the location of a mutation or its DNA-sequence alteration (or both) appears to influence survival, we suggest that the precise definition of the disease-causing mutation can provide important prognostic information about affected members.",2 4
"A novel p53 germline alteration identified in a late onset breast cancer kindred. || Aged Base Sequence Breast Neoplasms DNA, Neoplasm DNA, Satellite Female Genes, p53 Genetic Linkage Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Pedigree || Germline mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene are associated with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, characterized by childhood sarcoma, leukemia and early onset breast cancer and has occasionally been found also in familial breast-ovarian cancer. Most mutations found are of missense type and located in the central region of the gene (exons 5 to 8). In the present study, a germline p53 alteration was identified in a late onset breast cancer family (kindred Lund 5; mean age 58 years) using single stranded conformation polymorphism and sequence analysis. The mutation (a CCG to CTG transition) at codon 82 in exon 4, resulting in a proline to leucine substitution, has not previously been reported and was not present in a control set of 60 healthy individuals. Three of five woman with breast cancer (45, 57 and 65 years) were carriers of the alteration. Loss of heterozygosity at the p53 locus was not seen in the primary tumors of these women, but appeared as a partial loss of the wildtype allele in subsequent recurrent lesions of two gene carriers. The family manifested no linkage to the p53 gene (a two-point LOD-score of -0.41), and has previously also been excluded for linkage to the BRCA1 and BRCA2 loci, as well as being carrier of a BRCA1 germline mutation. Although it seems unlikely that the p53 germline mutation is the major cause of disease predisposition in Lund 5, the data suggest that some p53 alteration may confer a subtle influence on breast cancer development and progression.",2
"PTPN11 mutations in Noonan syndrome: molecular spectrum, genotype-phenotype correlation, and phenotypic heterogeneity. || Buffers Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Female Genetic Heterogeneity Genetic Variation Genotype Humans Introns Male Models, Molecular Mutation Noonan Syndrome Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Protein Conformation Protein Phosphatase 2 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Temperature || Noonan syndrome (NS) is a developmental disorder characterized by facial dysmorphia, short stature, cardiac defects, and skeletal malformations. We recently demonstrated that mutations in PTPN11, the gene encoding the non-receptor-type protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 (src homology region 2-domain phosphatase-2), cause NS, accounting for approximately 50% of cases of this genetically heterogeneous disorder in a small cohort. All mutations were missense changes and clustered at the interacting portions of the amino-terminal src-homology 2 (N-SH2) and protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) domains. A gain of function was postulated as a mechanism for the disease. Here, we report the spectrum and distribution of PTPN11 mutations in a large, well-characterized cohort with NS. Mutations were found in 54 of 119 (45%) unrelated individuals with sporadic or familial NS. There was a significantly higher prevalence of mutations among familial cases than among sporadic ones. All defects were missense, and several were recurrent. The vast majority of mutations altered amino acid residues located in or around the interacting surfaces of the N-SH2 and PTP domains, but defects also affected residues in the C-SH2 domain, as well as in the peptide linking the N-SH2 and C-SH2 domains. Genotype-phenotype analysis revealed that pulmonic stenosis was more prevalent among the group of subjects with NS who had PTPN11 mutations than it was in the group without them (70.6% vs. 46.2%; P<.01), whereas hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was less prevalent among those with PTPN11 mutations (5.9% vs. 26.2%; P<.005). The prevalence of other congenital heart malformations, short stature, pectus deformity, cryptorchidism, and developmental delay did not differ between the two groups. A PTPN11 mutation was identified in a family inheriting Noonan-like/multiple giant-cell lesion syndrome, extending the phenotypic range of disease associated with this gene.",2 4
"Clinical and functional characterization of the CDH1 germline variant c.1679C>G in three unrelated families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. ||  || Germline changes in the CDH1 tumor suppressor gene predispose to diffuse gastric cancer and lobular breast cancer. In carriers of deleterious germline CDH1 variants, prophylactic gastrectomy is recommended. In case of germline missense variants, it is mandatory to assess the functional impact on E-cadherin, the protein encoded by CDH1, and to predict their clinical significance. Herein, we have identified a recurrent germline missense variant, c.1679C>G, segregating with gastric cancer in three unrelated Spanish families. Through genetic, transcriptional, in silico and in vitro studies, we demonstrate the deleterious effect of the c.1679C>G variant and its association with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer, providing relevant data to relatives and allowing an accurate genetic counseling.",2 4
"A unique point mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 gene (FGFR3) defines a new craniosynostosis syndrome. ||  || The underlying basis of many forms of syndromic craniosynostosis has been defined on a molecular level. However, many patients with familial or sporadic craniosynostosis do not have the classical findings of those craniosynostosis syndromes. Here we present 61 individuals from 20 unrelated families where coronal synostosis is due to an amino acid substitution (Pro250Arg) that results from a single point mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 gene on chromosome 4p. In this instance, a new clinical syndrome is being defined on the basis of the molecular finding. In addition to the skull findings, some patients had abnormalities on radiographs of hands and feet, including thimble-like middle phalanges, coned epiphyses, and carpal and tarsal fusions. Brachydactyly was seen in some cases; none had clinically significant syndactyly or deviation of the great toe. Sensorineural hearing loss was present in some, and developmental delay was seen in a minority. While the radiological findings of hands and feet can be very helpful in diagnosing this syndrome, it is not in all cases clearly distinguishable on a clinical basis from other craniosynostosis syndromes. Therefore, this mutation should be tested for in patients with coronal synostosis.",2
"Molecular scanning analysis of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (TCF1) gene in typical familial type 2 diabetes in African Americans. || Adult African Americans Alleles DNA-Binding Proteins Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Exons Female Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta Humans Introns Male Middle Aged Nuclear Proteins Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Transcription Factors || Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is strongly inherited, but the major genes for this disease have been elusive. In contrast, early-onset, autosomal-dominant diabetes results from at least 5 loci, of which hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a (HNF1alpha or TCF1) is the most common cause. Mutations in HNF1alpha also cause later-onset diabetes in some Caucasian populations, but the role of these mutations has not been tested in African American populations. We used a variety of screening methods, including both single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis and dideoxy fingerprint analysis, to search for mutations in 51 African American subjects with onset of diabetes before age 50 years. Potential mutations were confirmed by direct sequencing. We identified 21 different variants, of which 11 were unique to African Americans. Four mutations either altered the amino acid sequence (Gly52Ala and Gly574Ser) or were close to a splice site (intron 1 and intron 10). A 5-nucleotide insertion in intron 1 was present in both diabetic members of a small family, but Gly52Ala, Gly574Ser, and the intron 10 mutation did not segregate with diabetes. Gly574Ser was present in 2 large families and 5% of controls, all of which appeared to share the same common HNF1alpha haplotype. Surprisingly, radioactive SSCP analysis under 2 room-temperature conditions performed as well as methods using fluorescent labeling that were expected to be more sensitive. We conclude that in African American individuals under age 50, variation in the HNF1a gene is common but unlikely to be a significant cause of T2DM.",2
"PTEN mutation spectrum and genotype-phenotype correlations in Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome suggest a single entity with Cowden syndrome. || Abnormalities, Multiple Cells, Cultured Chromosome Deletion Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10 Cohort Studies Craniofacial Abnormalities Family Health Female Genetic Carrier Screening Genetic Markers Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Heterozygote Humans Intellectual Disability Male Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phenotype Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Germline mutations in the tumour suppressor gene PTEN have been implicated in two hamartoma syndromes that exhibit some clinical overlap, Cowden syndrome (CS) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRR). PTEN maps to 10q23 and encodes a dual specificity phosphatase, a substrate of which is phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate, a phospholipid in the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway. CS is characterized by multiple hamartomas and an increased risk of benign and malignant disease of the breast, thyroid and central nervous system, whilst the presence of cancer has not been formally documented in BRR. The partial clinical overlap in these two syndromes is exemplified by the hallmark features of BRR: macrocephaly and multiple lipomas, the latter of which occur in a minority of individuals with CS. Additional features observed in BRR, which may also occur in a minority of CS patients, include Hashimoto's thyroiditis, vascular malformations and mental retardation. Pigmented macules of the glans penis, delayed motor development and neonatal or infant onset are noted only in BRR. In this study, constitutive DNA samples from 43 BRR individuals comprising 16 sporadic and 27 familial cases, 11 of which were families with both CS and BRR, were screened for PTEN mutations. Mutations were identified in 26 of 43 (60%) BRR cases. Genotype-phenotype analyses within the BRR group suggested a number of correlations, including the association of PTEN mutation and cancer or breast fibroadenoma in any given CS, BRR or BRR/CS overlap family ( P = 0.014), and, in particular, truncating mutations were associated with the presence of cancer and breast fibroadenoma in a given family ( P = 0.024). Additionally, the presence of lipomas was correlated with the presence of PTEN mutation in BRR patients ( P = 0.028). In contrast to a prior report, no significant difference in mutation status was found in familial versus sporadic cases of BRR ( P = 0.113). Comparisons between BRR and a previously studied group of 37 CS families suggested an increased likelihood of identifying a germline PTEN mutation in families with either CS alone or both CS and BRR when compared with BRR alone ( P = 0.002). Among CS, BRR and BRR/CS overlap families that are PTEN mutation positive, the mutation spectra appear similar. Thus, PTEN mutation-positive CS and BRR may be different presentations of a single syndrome and, hence, both should receive equal attention with respect to cancer surveillance.",2 3
"Founder and recurrent CDH1 mutations in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. ||  || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer is caused by germline mutations in the epithelial cadherin (CDH1) gene and is characterized by an increased risk for diffuse gastric cancer and lobular breast cancer. To determine whether recurring germline CDH1 mutations occurred due to independent mutational events or common ancestry. Thirty-eight families diagnosed clinically with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer were accrued between November 2004 and January 2006 and were analyzed for CDH1 mutations as part of an ongoing study at the British Columbia Cancer Agency. Twenty-six families had at least 2 gastric cancer cases with 1 case of diffuse gastric cancer in a person younger than 50 years; 12 families had either a single case of diffuse gastric cancer diagnosed in a person younger than 35 years or multiple cases of diffuse gastric cancer diagnosed in persons older than 50 years. Classification of family members as carriers or noncarriers of CDH1 mutations. Haplotype analysis to assess recurring mutations for common ancestry was performed on 7 families from this study and 7 previously reported families with the same mutations. Thirteen mutations (6 novel) were identified in 15 of the 38 families (40% detection rate). The 1137G>A splicing mutation and the 1901C>T (A634V) missense/splicing mutation occurred on common haplotypes in 2 families but on different haplotypes in a third family. The 2195G>A (R732Q) missense/splicing mutation occurred in 2 families on different haplotypes. The 2064-2065delTG mutation occurred on a common haplotype in 2 families. Two families from this study plus 2 additional families carrying the novel 2398delC mutation shared a common haplotype, suggesting a founder effect. All 4 families originate from the southeast coast of Newfoundland. Due to concentrations of lobular breast cancer cases, 2 branches of this family had been diagnosed as having hereditary breast cancer and were tested for BRCA mutations. Within these 4 families, the cumulative risk by age 75 years in mutation carriers for clinically detected gastric cancer was 40% (95% confidence interval [CI], 12%-91%) for males and 63% (95% CI, 19%-99%) for females and the risk for breast cancer in female mutation carriers was 52% (95% CI, 29%-94%). Recurrent CDH1 mutations in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer are due to both independent mutational events and common ancestry. The presence of a founder mutation from Newfoundland is strongly supported.",2 4 0 3
"Organization and sequence of human cardiac myosin binding protein C gene (MYBPC3) and identification of mutations predicted to produce truncated proteins in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. ||  || Cardiac myosin binding protein C (MyBP-C) is a sarcomeric protein belonging to the intracellular immunoglobulin superfamily. Its function is uncertain, but for a decade evidence has existed for both structural and regulatory roles. The gene encoding cardiac MyBP-C (MYBPC3) in humans is located on chromosome 11p11.2, and mutations have been identified in this gene in unrelated families with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC). Detailed characterization of the MYBPC3 gene is essential for studies on gene regulation, analysis of the role of MyBP-C in cardiac contraction through the use of recombinant DNA technology, and mutational analyses of FHC. The organization of human MYBPC3 and screening for mutations in a panel of French families with FHC were established using polymerase chain reaction, single-strand conformation polymorphism, and sequencing. The MYBPC3 gene comprises > 21,000 base pairs and contains 35 exons. Two exons are unusually small in size, 3 bp each. We found six new mutations associated with FHC in seven unrelated French families. Four of these mutations are predicted to produce truncated cardiac MyBP-C polypeptides. The two others should each produce two aberrant proteins, one truncated and one mutated. The present study provides the first organization and sequence for an MyBP-C gene. The mutations reported here and previously in MYBPC3 result in aberrant transcripts that are predicted to encode significantly truncated cardiac MyBP-C polypeptides. This spectrum of mutations differs from the ones previously observed in other disease genes causing FHC. Our data strengthen the functional importance of MyBP-C in the regulation of cardiac work and provide the basis for further studies.",2 0
"TP53 germline mutations in Portugal and genetic modifiers of age at cancer onset. || Age of Onset Female Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Pedigree Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Portugal Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-mdm2 Telomere || The Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare, autosomal dominant disease caused by TP53 germline mutations. This study aimed to characterize the TP53 mutational spectrum in patients suspected to have LFS in Portugal and to evaluate the influence of the MDM2-SNP309 and TP53-72Arg variants and of telomere length on age of tumor onset. Probands were primarily selected using the classical LFS criteria (two cases) or the more sensitive Chompret Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) criteria (13 cases), but 12 additional patients that did not comply with those LFS or LFL criteria were included in the analysis based on clinical suspicion (LFS suspects). Nine of the 27 probands (33.3%) presented germline TP53 mutations, two of them occurring de novo and two of them being novel. Three of the nine TP53 mutations were found in families that did not comply with any of the commonly used criteria for TP53 testing, leaving room to recommend the use of less stringent criteria. An association was found between the presence of the TP53-72Arg (but not the MDM2-SNP309) variant and earlier age of onset in TP53 carriers. A negative correlation between telomere length and age of cancer onset was found in patients with germline TP53 mutation, whereas no such correlation was found in controls or in patients with wild-type TP53.",2
"Next-generation sequencing in familial breast cancer patients from Lebanon. || Adult Aged BRCA1 Protein BRCA2 Protein Breast Neoplasms DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Lebanon Middle Aged Mutation || Familial breast cancer (BC) represents 5 to 10% of all BC cases. Mutations in two high susceptibility BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes explain 16-40% of familial BC, while other high, moderate and low susceptibility genes explain up to 20% more of BC families. The Lebanese reported prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 deleterious mutations (5.6% and 12.5%) were lower than those reported in the literature. In the presented study, 45 Lebanese patients with a reported family history of BC were tested using Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) technique followed by Sanger sequencing validation. Nineteen pathogenic mutations were identified in this study. These 19 mutations were found in 13 different genes such as: ABCC12, APC, ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, CDH1, ERCC6, MSH2, POLH, PRF1, SLX4, STK11 and TP53. In this first application of WES on BC in Lebanon, we detected six BRCA1 and BRCA2 deleterious mutations in seven patients, with a total prevalence of 15.5%, a figure that is lower than those reported in the Western literature. The p.C44F mutation in the BRCA1 gene appeared twice in this study, suggesting a founder effect. Importantly, the overall mutation prevalence was equal to 40%, justifying the urgent need to deploy WES for the identification of genetic variants responsible for familial BC in the Lebanese population.",2
"PTPN11 mutations in patients with LEOPARD syndrome: a French multicentric experience. || Adolescent Adult Child DNA Mutational Analysis Female France Humans Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins LEOPARD Syndrome Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases || ",2 4
"Vestibular deterioration precedes hearing deterioration in the P51S COCH mutation (DFNA9): an analysis in 74 mutation carriers. ||  || To analyze cochleovestibular impairment features in P51S COCH mutation carriers (n = 22) in a new, large Dutch family and to compare the results to those obtained in previously identified similar mutation carriers (n = 52). To evaluate age-related features between progressive hearing and vestibular impairment of all mutation carriers (n = 74). Family study. Regression analysis was performed in relation to age to outline the development of hearing thresholds, speech recognition scores, and vestibulo-ocular reflex time constant as the key vestibular response parameter. Pure tone thresholds, phoneme recognition scores, and vestibular responses of the mutation carriers in the new family were essentially similar to those previously established in all other mutation carriers. Hearing started to deteriorate in all mutation carriers from 43 years of age onwards, whereas deterioration of vestibular function started from age 34. Vestibular impairment starts earlier, progresses more rapidly, and, eventually, is more complete than hearing impairment in P51S COCH mutation carriers.",2 4
"Novel mutations and a mutational hotspot in the MODY3 gene. || Chromosomes, Human, Pair 12 DNA Mutational Analysis DNA Primers DNA-Binding Proteins Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Family Genetic Linkage Haplotypes Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta Humans Mutation Nuclear Proteins Pedigree Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Transcription Factors || Maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3 (MODY3) is a type of NIDDM caused by mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) located on chromosome 12q. We have identified four novel HNF-1alpha missense mutations in MODY3 families. In four additional and unrelated families, we observed an identical insertion mutation that had occurred in a polycytidine tract in exon 4. Among those families, one exhibited a de novo mutation at this location. We propose that instability of this sequence represents a general mutational mechanism in MODY3. We observed no HNF-1alpha mutations among 86 unrelated late-onset diabetic patients with relative insulin deficiency. Hence mutations in this gene appear to be most strongly associated with early-onset diabetes.",2
"Heterozygous ABCC8 mutations are a cause of MODY. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Adult Amino Acid Substitution Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Genetic Association Studies Heterozygote Humans Hypoglycemic Agents Leukocytes Male Microsatellite Repeats Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Protein Subunits Receptors, Drug Sulfonylurea Compounds Sulfonylurea Receptors United Kingdom Young Adult || The ABCC8 gene encodes the sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1) subunit of the pancreatic beta cell ATP-sensitive potassium (K(ATP)) channel. Inactivating mutations cause congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) and activating mutations cause transient neonatal diabetes (TNDM) or permanent neonatal diabetes (PNDM) that can usually be treated with sulfonylureas. Sulfonylurea sensitivity is also a feature of HNF1A and HNF4A MODY, but patients referred for genetic testing with clinical features of these types of diabetes do not always have mutations in the HNF1A/4A genes. Our aim was to establish whether mutations in the ABCC8 gene cause MODY that is responsive to sulfonylurea therapy. We sequenced the ABCC8 gene in 85 patients with a BMI <30 kg/m², no family history of neonatal diabetes and who were deemed sensitive to sulfonylureas by the referring clinician or were sulfonylurea-treated. All had tested negative for mutations in the HNF1A and HNF4A genes. ABCC8 mutations were found in seven of the 85 (8%) probands. Four patients were heterozygous for previously reported mutations and four novel mutations, E100K, G214R, Q485R and N1245D, were identified. Only four probands fulfilled MODY criteria, with two diagnosed after 25 years and one patient, who had no family history of diabetes, as a result of a proven de novo mutation. ABCC8 mutations can cause MODY in patients whose clinical features are similar to those with HNF1A/4A MODY. Therefore, sequencing of ABCC8 in addition to the known MODY genes should be considered if such features are present, to facilitate optimal clinical management of these patients.",2 4
"E-cadherin mutation-based genetic counseling and hereditary diffuse gastric carcinoma. || Cadherins DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Counseling Humans Mutation Stomach Neoplasms || The E-cadherin mutation has been identified in a subset of families with multiple cases of diffuse gastric carcinoma. However, the true penetrance of this mutation and its association with other carcinomas in such families remains elusive. We aim to show the importance of DNA-based genetic counseling in hereditary diffuse gastric carcinoma. The proband was self-referred after three of his siblings died of diffuse gastric carcinoma. Medical and pathology records confirmed diagnoses. The family was educated about diffuse gastric carcinoma. Analysis for the 70G-->T mutation was performed by sequencing genomic DNA from lymphocyte pellets. DNA results and genetic counseling were provided individually to those tested. Twenty-four family members were tested for the E-cadherin mutation. Nine were found to be positive and 15 were negative. Three who tested positive and were affected are now deceased. None of the 19 patients counseled wanted results sent to their physicians once they recognized the potential for insurance discrimination. None had undergone endoscopic ultrasound. Three who were positive for the E-cadherin mutation expressed strong interest in prophylactic gastrectomy. The E-cadherin mutation strongly predicts susceptibility to diffuse gastric carcinoma. Emotional stress in at-risk patients, the limited knowledge of the mutation's penetrance, and limitations of available screening mandate patient-centered genetic counseling.",2 4
"Re-evaluation casts doubt on the pathogenicity of homozygous USH2A p.C759F. || Base Sequence Cyclic Nucleotide Phosphodiesterases, Type 6 Extracellular Matrix Proteins Gene Library Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense Pedigree Retinitis Pigmentosa Sequence Analysis, DNA Spain || Mutations in USH2A are a common cause of Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP). Among the most frequently reported USH2A variants, c.2276G>T (p.C759F) has been found in both affected and healthy individuals. The pathogenicity of this variant remains controversial since it was detected in homozygosity in two healthy siblings of a Spanish family (S23), eleven years ago. The fact that these individuals remain asymptomatic today, prompted us to study the presence of other pathogenic variants in this family using targeted resequencing of 26 retinal genes in one of the affected individuals. This approach allowed us to identify one novel pathogenic homozygous mutation in exon 13 of PDE6B (c.1678C>T; p.R560C). This variant cosegregated with the disease and was absent in 200 control individuals. Remarkably, the identified variant in PDE6B corresponds to the mutation responsible of the retinal degeneration in the naturally occurring rd10 mutant mice. To our knowledge, this is the first report of the identification of the rd10 mice mutation in a RP family. These findings, together with a review of the literature, support the hypothesis that homozygous p.C759F mutations are not pathogenic and led us to exclude the implication of p.C759F in the RP of family S23. Our results indicate the need of re-evaluating all families genetically diagnosed with this mutation.",2
"Molecular heterogeneity of nonphenylketonuria hyperphenylalaninemia in 25 Danish patients. || Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Base Sequence Codon DNA Denmark Exons Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Introns Mass Screening Phenotype Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Point Mutation || ",2 1 3
"Detection of a novel mutation (stop 468) in exon 10 of the low-density lipoprotein receptor gene causing familial hypercholesterolemia among French Canadians. || Adolescent Adult Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies DNA Primers Exons Female France Heterozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Quebec Receptors, LDL || ",2 4
"Mutation spectrum of six genes in Chinese phenylketonuria patients obtained through next-generation sequencing. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Biopterin China Computational Biology DNA Mutational Analysis High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans INDEL Mutation Multiplex Polymerase Chain Reaction Mutation Pedigree Phenylketonurias || The identification of gene variants plays an important role in the diagnosis of genetic diseases. To develop a rapid method for the diagnosis of phenylketonuria (PKU) and tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) deficiency, we designed a multiplex, PCR-based primer panel to amplify all the exons and flanking regions (50 bp average) of six PKU-associated genes (PAH, PTS, GCH1, QDPR, PCBD1 and GFRP). The Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM) System was used to detect mutations in all the exons of these six genes. We tested 93 DNA samples from blood specimens from 35 patients and their parents (32 families) and 26 healthy adults. Using strict bioinformatic criteria, this sequencing data provided, on average, 99.14% coverage of the 39 exons at more than 70-fold mean depth of coverage. We found 23 previously documented variants in the PAH gene and six novel mutations in the PAH and PTS genes. A detailed analysis of the mutation spectrum of these patients is described in this study. These results were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. In conclusion, benchtop next-generation sequencing technology can be used to detect mutations in monogenic diseases and can detect both point mutations and indels with high sensitivity, fidelity and throughput at a lower cost than conventional methods in clinical applications.",2 1 3
"PDZD7 is a modifier of retinal disease and a contributor to digenic Usher syndrome. || Frameshift Mutation Genotype Hearing Loss Homozygote Humans Male Mutation Phenotype Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled Retinitis Pigmentosa Siblings Syndrome Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous recessive disease characterized by hearing loss and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). It frequently presents with unexplained, often intrafamilial, variability of the visual phenotype. Although 9 genes have been linked with Usher syndrome, many patients do not have mutations in any of these genes, suggesting that there are still unidentified genes involved in the syndrome. Here, we have determined that mutations in PDZ domain-containing 7 (PDZD7), which encodes a homolog of proteins mutated in Usher syndrome subtype 1C (USH1C) and USH2D, contribute to Usher syndrome. Mutations in PDZD7 were identified only in patients with mutations in other known Usher genes. In a set of sisters, each with a homozygous mutation in USH2A, a frame-shift mutation in PDZD7 was present in the sister with more severe RP and earlier disease onset. Further, heterozygous PDZD7 mutations were present in patients with truncating mutations in USH2A, G protein-coupled receptor 98 (GPR98; also known as USH2C), and an unidentified locus. We validated the human genotypes using zebrafish, and our findings were consistent with digenic inheritance of PDZD7 and GPR98, and with PDZD7 as a retinal disease modifier in patients with USH2A. Pdzd7 knockdown produced an Usher-like phenotype in zebrafish, exacerbated retinal cell death in combination with ush2a or gpr98, and reduced Gpr98 localization in the region of the photoreceptor connecting cilium. Our data challenge the view of Usher syndrome as a traditional Mendelian disorder and support the reclassification of Usher syndrome as an oligogenic disease.",2 1 3
"Cowden syndrome and Bannayan Riley Ruvalcaba syndrome represent one condition with variable expression and age-related penetrance: results of a clinical study of PTEN mutation carriers. || Adolescent Adult Age Factors Aged Child Child, Preschool Exons Female Genetic Heterogeneity Genotype Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Penetrance Phenotype Syndrome Terminology as Topic || The most commonly reported phenotypes described in patients with PTEN mutations are Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS), with childhood onset, macrocephaly, lipomas and developmental delay, and Cowden Syndrome (CS), an adult-onset condition recognised by mucocutaneous signs, with a risk of cancers, in particular those of the thyroid and breast. It has been suggested that BRRS and CS are the same condition, but the literature continues to separate them and seek a genotype-phenotype correlation. To study the clinical features of patients with known PTEN mutations and observe any genotype-phenotype correlation. In total, 42 people (25 probands and 17 non-probands) from 26 families of all ages with PTEN mutations were recruited through the UK clinical genetics services. A full clinical history and examination were undertaken. We were unable to demonstrate a genotype-phenotype correlation. Furthermore, our findings in a 31-year-old woman with CS and an exon 1 deletion refutes previous reports that whole exon deletions are only found in patients with a BRRS phenotype. Careful phenotyping gives further support for the suggestion that BRRS and CS are actually one condition, presenting variably at different ages, as in other tumour-suppressor disorders such as neurofibromatosis type 1. This has important counselling implications, such as advice about cancer surveillance, for children diagnosed with BRRS.",2 3
"A new missense mutation, Arg719Gln, in the beta-cardiac heavy chain myosin gene of patients with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Amino Acid Sequence Arginine Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 1 Chromosomes, Human, Pair 11 Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15 DNA DNA Primers Female Glutamine Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Myocardium Myosins Pedigree Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Reference Values || ",2 4
"Coronary microvascular dysfunction is an early feature of cardiac involvement in patients with Anderson-Fabry disease. || Coronary microvascular dysfunction Early phenotype Fabry disease PET || Male patients with Anderson-Fabry disease (AFD) often exhibit cardiac involvement, characterized by LV hypertrophy (LVH), associated with severe coronary microvascular dysfunction (CMD). Whether CMD is present in patients without LVH, particularly when female, remains unresolved. The aim of the study was to investigate the presence of CMD by positron emission tomography (PET) in AFD patients of both genders, with and without evidence of LVH. We assessed myocardial blood flow following dipyridamole infusion (Dip-MBF) with 13N-labelled ammonia by PET in 30 AFD patients (age 51 ± 13 years; 18 females) and in 24 healthy controls. LVH was defined as echocardiographic maximal LV wall thickness ≥13 mm. LVH was present in 67% of patients (n = 20; 10 males and 10 females). Dip-MBF was reduced in all patients compared with controls (1.8 ± 0.5 and 3.2 ± 0.5 mL/min/g, respectively, P < 0.001). For both genders, flow impairment was most severe in patients with LVH (1.4 ± 0.5 mL/min/g in males and 1.9 ± 0.5 mL/min/g in females), but was also evident in those without LVH (1.8 ± 0.3 mL/min/g in males and 2.1 ± 0.4 mL/min/g in females; overall P = 0.064 vs. patients with LVH). Analysis of variance (ANOVA) for the 17 LV segments showed marked regional heterogeneity of MBF in AFD (F = 4.46, P < 0.01), with prevalent hypoperfusion of the apical region. Conversely, controls showed homogeneous LV perfusion (F = 1.25, P = 0.23). Coronary microvascular function is markedly impaired in AFD patients irrespective of LVH and gender. CMD may represent the only sign of cardiac involvement in AFD patients, with potentially important implications for clinical management.",2
"A p.R870H mutation in the beta-cardiac myosin heavy chain 7 gene causes familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in several members of an Indian family. || Adolescent Adult Aged Angiotensins Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Female Humans Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular India Male Middle Aged Molecular Diagnostic Techniques Mutation Myocardium Myosin Heavy Chains Myosins Pilot Projects Polymorphism, Genetic Risk Factors Sarcomeres || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder characterized mainly by left ventricular hypertrophy and myocyte disarray; it is the most common cause of sudden death in otherwise healthy individuals. More than 270 mutations in genes encoding the cardiac sarcomere have been identified. Attempts to establish a genotype-phenotype correlation for each of the mutations have not been highly successful. It has been suggested that additional genetic loci, as well as nongenetic factors such as lifestyle, gender and age, may play a role in modulating the clinical presentation of the disease. The p.R870H mutation has been identified as the cause of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in an Indian family. The results indicate that the disease phenotype varied among various affected members of the family, and the variation may be attributed to factors, such as gender and gene dosage.",2 4
"Novel variants in the MC4R and LEPR genes among severely obese children from the Iberian population. || Anthropometry Base Sequence Computational Biology Genetic Testing Genotype Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Obesity, Morbid Phenotype Portugal Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Leptin Sequence Analysis, DNA Spain || We screened for mutations in the MC4R and LEPR genes and investigated the genotype-phenotype correlation in obese individuals belonging to families with evident hereditary patterns of severe and early-onset obesity among the Iberian population. A total of 202 unrelated and severely obese patients since childhood, were enrolled in the study. Bidirectional sequencing of the MC4R gene was carried out in all patients; the LEPR gene was sequenced in 15 individuals based on additional clinical signals. Segregation analysis and/or genotype-phenotype description was performed for subjects with the new mutations and with presumably functional variants. Ten MC4R gene mutations were identified in the heterozygous state in 10 patients. Mutations p.R147G and p.G323E are new and mutations p.R7H, p.G32E, p.H76R, p.V103I, p.S127L, p.T150I, p.I251L and p.G252S were previously described. A new dinucleotide insertion -77_-76insTA in the promoter region of the LEPR gene was found in the heterozygous state in one patient. The new p.R147G and the previously published p.R7H, p.S127L, p.T150I and p.G252S MC4R mutations, cosegregate with obesity in our patients and were predicted to be deleterious. For the novel MC4R p.G323E and LEPR -77_-76insTA gene mutations, the genotype-phenotype correlation and bioinformatic analysis did not clarify whether these mutations are indeed implicated in obesity.",2 4
"E-cadherin germline mutations define an inherited cancer syndrome dominated by diffuse gastric cancer. ||  || To extend earlier observations of germline E-cadherin mutations in kindreds with an inherited susceptibility to diffuse gastric cancer, we searched for germline E-cadherin mutations in five further families affected predominantly by diffuse gastric cancer and one family with a history of diffuse gastric cancer and early-onset breast cancer. Heterozygous inactivating mutations were found in the E-cadherin gene in each of these families. No mutation hotspots were identified. These results demonstrate that germline mutation of the E-cadherin gene is a common cause of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer and suggest a role for these mutations in the incidence of breast cancer.",2 4
The p.Arg118Cys Variant in the GLA Gene Does Not Cause Fabry Disease. More Evidence. || Biopsy DNA Echocardiography Electrocardiography Fabry Disease Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Myocardium Pedigree alpha-Galactosidase || ,2 1
"Genetic analysis through OtoSeq of Pakistani families segregating prelingual hearing loss. || Alleles Cadherins Female Genetic Linkage Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genotype Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Membrane Transport Proteins Microsatellite Repeats Mutation Myosins Pakistan Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction Prospective Studies Sulfate Transporters Usher Syndromes || To identify the genetic cause of prelingual sensorineural hearing loss in Pakistani families using a next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based mutation screening test named OtoSeq. Prospective study. Research laboratory. We used 3 fluorescently labeled short tandem repeat (STR) markers for each of the known autosomal recessive nonsyndromic (DFNB) and Usher syndrome (USH) locus to perform a linkage analysis of 243 multigenerational Pakistani families segregating prelingual hearing loss. After genotyping, we focused on 34 families with potential linkage to MYO7A, CDH23, and SLC26A4. We screened affected individuals from a subset of these families using the OtoSeq platform to identify underlying genetic variants. Sanger sequencing was performed to confirm and study the segregation of mutations in other family members. For novel mutations, normal hearing individuals from ethnically matched backgrounds were also tested. Hearing loss was found to co-segregate with locus-specific STR markers for MYO7A in 32 families, CDH23 in 1 family, and SLC26A4 in 1 family. Using the OtoSeq platform, a microdroplet PCR-based enrichment followed by NGS, we identified mutations in 28 of the 34 families including 11 novel mutations. Sanger sequencing of these mutations showed 100% concordance with NGS data and co-segregation of the mutant alleles with the hearing loss phenotype in the respective families. Using NGS-based platforms like OtoSeq in families segregating hearing loss will contribute to the identification of common and population-specific mutations, early diagnosis, genetic counseling, and molecular epidemiology.",2 1
"Insights into the pathogenicity of rare missense GCK variants from the identification and functional characterization of compound heterozygous and double mutations inherited in cis. || Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Genetic Testing Glucokinase Heterozygote Humans Male Mutation, Missense Pedigree || To demonstrate the importance of using a combined genetic and functional approach to correctly interpret a genetic test for monogenic diabetes. We identified three probands with a phenotype consistent with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) subtype GCK-MODY, in whom two potential pathogenic mutations were identified: [R43H/G68D], [E248 K/I225M], or [G261R/D217N]. Allele-specific PCR and cosegregation were used to determine phase. Single and double mutations were kinetically characterized. The mutations occurred in cis (double mutants) in two probands and in trans in one proband. Functional studies of all double mutants revealed inactivating kinetics. The previously reported GCK-MODY mutations R43H and G68D were inherited from an affected father and unaffected mother, respectively. Both our functional and genetic studies support R43H as the cause of GCK-MODY and G68D as a neutral rare variant. These data highlight the need for family/functional studies, even for previously reported pathogenic mutations.",2 4
"p53 mosaicism with an exon 8 germline mutation in the founder of a cancer-prone pedigree. ||  || Changes in the tumor-suppressor gene p53 are frequently acquired during the course of malignant development of human tumors. Recently, constitutional heterozygous mutations in p53 exon 7 have been identified as the primary cause of cancer predisposition in cases of the familial Li-Fraumeni cancer syndrome. These findings underline the need for extensive mutation screening in families with high cancer incidence. This report describes the detection and follow-up by two-dimensional single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis (2DSSCP) of a new germline mutation of p53 exon 8 in a case of suspected Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Although a high cancer incidence had been reported in the family history of the father of siblings suffering from brain tumor and rhabdomyosarcoma, a constitutional heterozygous p53 mutation was identified only in the affected children. Retrospective analysis of archival tissue of a half-sister who died several years ago from a tumor of previously uncertain diagnosis revealed the same mutation. The mutation had therefore occurred in the germ cells of the mother, who thus appears to be a mosaic. The cancer predisposition of the paternal ancestors must have been due to other factors.",2
"Prevalence and distribution of sarcomeric gene mutations in Japanese patients with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Actins Adult Aged Asian Continental Ancestry Group Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Carrier Proteins Female Geography Humans Japan MAP Kinase Kinase Kinases Male Middle Aged Myosin Heavy Chains Myosin Light Chains Pedigree Prevalence Sarcomeres Tropomyosin Troponin T Young Adult || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), which is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, is the most prevalent hereditary cardiac disease. Although there are several reports on the systematic screening of mutations in the disease-causing genes in European and American populations, only limited information is available for Asian populations, including Japanese. Genetic screening of disease-associated mutations in 8 genes for sarcomeric proteins, MYH7, MYBPC3, MYL2, MYL3, TNNT2, TNNI3, TPM1, and ACTC, was performed by direct sequencing in 112 unrelated Japanese proband patients with familial HCM; 37 different mutations, including 13 novel ones in 5 genes, MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNT2, TNNI3, and TPM1, were identified in 49 (43.8%) patients. Among them, 3 carried compound heterozygous mutations in MYBPC3 or TNNT2. The frequency of patients carrying the MYBPC3, MYH7, and TNNT2 mutations were 19.6%, 10.7%, and 8.9%, respectively, and the most frequently affected genes in the northeastern and southwestern parts of Japan were MYBPC3 and MYH7, respectively. Several mutations were found in multiple unrelated proband patients, for which the geographic distribution suggested founder effects of the mutations. This study demonstrated the frequency and distribution of mutations in a large cohort of familial HCM in Japan.",2 4
"Identification of novel TP53 mutations in familial and sporadic cancer cases of German and Swiss origin. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Child Child, Preschool Female Genes, p53 Germ-Line Mutation Germany Humans Infant Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Middle Aged Pedigree RNA Splice Sites Switzerland || Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a rare cancer syndrome caused by mutations in the TP53 gene. A number of tumor-associated germline mutations have been described in individuals from various ethnic origins although, thus far, none in affected individuals of German descent. Our work aimed to detect germline mutations in the TP53 gene in five index cases of German and Swiss origin with cancers typical of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. We analyzed all ten coding exons of the TP53 gene by direct sequencing of PCR products. We identified five mutations of which three were found in families with a strong history of LFS in several generations while two likely came about de novo. The five mutations include two missense mutations in exon 4 (Gly105Cys) and exon 7 (Arg248Gln), one deletion of 11 base pairs encompassing the splice acceptor sequence of exon 6 (IVS5-11_-1 del), one nonsense mutation in exon 6 (Arg196Stop), and one duplication of 4 base pairs in exon 8 (1020_1023dupCTGC). The functional consequence of the IVS5-11_-1del mutation on splicing of pre-mRNA was investigated by an in vitro assay. Our study reports the first germline mutations in patients of German and Swiss origin with LFS-related tumors. The frequent identification of de novo germline mutations emphasizes the importance of mutational analyses of the TP53 gene particularly in young patients with malignancies typical for LFS, but without a positive family history of this tumor syndrome.",2
"A molecular basis for familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a beta cardiac myosin heavy chain gene missense mutation. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Blotting, Southern Cardiomegaly DNA DNA Probes Exons Female Genes Genomic Library Humans Macromolecular Substances Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Myocardium Myosin Subfragments Oligonucleotide Probes Pedigree Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Restriction Mapping Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid || A point mutation in exon 13 of the beta cardiac myosin heavy chain (MHC) gene is present in all individuals affected with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) from a large kindred. This missense mutation converts a highly conserved arginine residue (Arg-403) to a glutamine. Affected individuals from an unrelated family lack this missense mutation, but instead have an alpha/beta cardiac MHC hybrid gene. Identification of two unique mutations within cardiac MHC genes in all individuals with FHC from two unrelated families demonstrates that defects in the cardiac MHC genes can cause this disease. The pathology resulting from a missense mutation at residue 403 further suggests that a critical function of myosin is disrupted by this mutation.",2 4
"Biochemical and imaging surveillance in germline TP53 mutation carriers with Li-Fraumeni syndrome: a prospective observational study. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Female Germ-Line Mutation Heterozygote Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Middle Aged Prospective Studies Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome have a high lifetime risk of developing cancer. We assessed the feasibility and potential clinical effect of a comprehensive surveillance protocol in asymptomatic TP53 mutation carriers in families with this syndrome. We implemented a clinical surveillance protocol, using frequent biochemical and imaging studies, for asymptomatic TP53 mutation carriers on Jan 1, 2004, and did a prospective observational study of members of eight families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome who either chose to undergo surveillance or chose not to undergo surveillance. The primary outcome measure was detection of new cancers. The secondary outcome measure was overall survival. As of Nov 1, 2010, 33 TP53 mutation carriers were identified, 18 of whom underwent surveillance. The surveillance protocol detected ten asymptomatic tumours in seven patients, including small, high-grade tumours and low-grade or premalignant tumours. All seven mutation carriers were alive after a median follow-up of 24 months (IQR 22-65 months). 12 high-grade, high-stage tumours developed in 10 individuals in the non-surveillance group, two of whom (20%) were alive at the end of follow-up (p=0·0417 for comparison with survival in the surveillance group). 3-year overall survival was 100% in the surveillance group and 21% (95% CI 4-48%) in the non-surveillance group (p=0·0155). Our findings show the feasibility of a clinical surveillance protocol for the detection of asymptomatic neoplasms in individuals with germline TP53 mutations. This strategy offers a management option for affected individuals, and its benefits lend support to the use of early genetic testing of at-risk individuals and families. Canadian Cancer Society Research Institute, Canadian Institutes of Health Research, SickKids Foundation, and Soccer for Hope.",2 4
"Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer Syndrome: CDH1 Mutations and Beyond. ||  || E-cadherin (CDH1) is a cancer predisposition gene mutated in families meeting clinically defined hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). Reliable estimates of cancer risk and spectrum in germline mutation carriers are essential for management. For families without CDH1 mutations, genetic-based risk stratification has not been possible, resulting in limited clinical options. To derive accurate estimates of gastric and breast cancer risks in CDH1 mutation carriers and determine if germline mutations in other genes are associated with HDGC. Testing for CDH1 germline mutations was performed on 183 index cases meeting clinical criteria for HDGC. Penetrance was derived from 75 mutation-positive families from within this and other cohorts, comprising 3858 probands (353 with gastric cancer and 89 with breast cancer). Germline DNA from 144 HDGC probands lacking CDH1 mutations was screened using multiplexed targeted sequencing for 55 cancer-associated genes. Accurate estimates of gastric and breast cancer risks in CDH1 mutation carriers and the relative contribution of other cancer predisposition genes in familial gastric cancers. Thirty-one distinct pathogenic CDH1 mutations (14 novel) were identified in 34 of 183 index cases (19%). By the age of 80 years, the cumulative incidence of gastric cancer was 70% (95% CI, 59%-80%) for males and 56% (95% CI, 44%-69%) for females, and the risk of breast cancer for females was 42% (95% CI, 23%-68%). In CDH1 mutation-negative index cases, candidate mutations were identified in 16 of 144 probands (11%), including mutations within genes of high and moderate penetrance: CTNNA1, BRCA2, STK11, SDHB, PRSS1, ATM, MSR1, and PALB2. This is the largest reported series of CDH1 mutation carriers, providing more precise estimates of age-associated risks of gastric and breast cancer that will improve counseling of unaffected carriers. In HDGC families lacking CDH1 mutations, testing of CTNNA1 and other tumor suppressor genes should be considered. Clinically defined HDGC families can harbor mutations in genes (ie, BRCA2) with different clinical ramifications from CDH1. Therefore, we propose that HDGC syndrome may be best defined by mutations in CDH1 and closely related genes, rather than through clinical criteria that capture families with heterogeneous susceptibility profiles.",2 4 3
"Identification of two different mutations in the PDS gene in an inbred family with Pendred syndrome. || Base Sequence Carrier Proteins Consanguinity DNA Deafness Female Goiter Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Male Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Mutation, Missense Pedigree Point Mutation RNA Splicing Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Turkey || Recently the gene responsible for Pendred syndrome (PDS) was isolated and several mutations in the PDS gene have been identified in Pendred patients. Here we report the occurrence of two different PDS mutations in an extended inbred Turkish family. The majority of patients in this family are homozygous for a splice site mutation (1143-2A-->G) affecting the 3' splice site consensus sequence of intron 7. However, two affected sibs with non-consanguineous parents are compound heterozygotes for the splice site mutation and a missense mutation (1558T-->G), substituting an evolutionarily conserved amino acid. The latter mutation has been found previously in two Pendred families originating from The Netherlands, indicating that the 1558T-->G mutation may be a common mutation.",2
"Long-term outcome of 4 Korean families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by 4 different mutations. ||  || We sought to describe the long-term outcome of individuals in 4 Korean families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) with known mutations. Long-term clinical features of familial HCM might be characterized according to the mutation causing HCM. We performed long-term (mean, 13.1 y) clinical evaluations on 46 subjects from 4 Korean families with different mutations. Myosin light chain 3 gene (MYL3) mutation was associated with late-onset HCM with relatively poor prognosis; 1 sudden cardiac death and 2 cases of heart failure with atrial fibrillation occurred among 12 subjects with this mutation. Myosin binding protein C gene (MYBPC3) mutation was associated with 2 cases of sudden cardiac death and 3 cases of heart failure among 7 affected members. Cardiac troponin I type 3 gene (TNNI3) mutation was associated with 5 deaths related to atrial fibrillation and stroke among 12 mutation-positive members. Myosin heavy chain 7 gene (MYH7) mutation was associated with 11 deaths in 15 affected members. The clinical course was quite different for different HCM mutations. Even within the same family, individuals carrying the same mutation differed in disease expression and prognosis.",2 4
"The importance of an integrated analysis of clinical, molecular, and functional data for the genetic diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia. || Adult Cardiovascular Diseases Cholesterol, LDL Female Genotype Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Portugal Risk Factors || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is one of the most common monogenic disorders, and the high concentrations of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol presented since birth confers on these patients an increased cardiovascular risk. More than 1,600 alterations have been described in the LDL receptor gene (LDLR), but a large number need to be validated as mutations causing disease to establish a diagnosis of FH. This study aims to characterize, both at the phenotypic and genotypic levels, families with a clinical diagnosis of FH and present evidence for the importance of the integration of clinical, molecular, and functional data for the correct diagnosis of patients with FH. A detailed analysis of the phenotype and genotype presented by 55 families with 13 different alterations in the LDLR was conducted. For eight of these, an extensive functional characterization was performed by flow cytometry, confocal microscopy, and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Carriers of neutral alterations presented a significantly lower incidence of premature cardiovascular disease, lower levels of atherogenic lipoproteins and a large number of these individuals had LDL-cholesterol values below the 75(th) percentile. presented a significantly lower incidence of premature cardiovascular disease, lower levels of atherogenic lipoproteins and a large number of these individuals had LDL-cholesterol values below the 75th percentile However, the functional study was essential to determine the pathogenicity of variants. The data collected illustrate the importance of this integrated analysis for the correct assessment of patients with FH who can otherwise be misdiagnosed.",2 4 0
"The cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene is not the predominant gene for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in the Finnish population. || Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Female Finland Genetic Linkage Genetic Variation Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Myocardium Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Tropomyosin || The aim of the study was to screen 36 unrelated patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM; 16 familial and 20 sporadic cases) from a genetically homogeneous area in eastern Finland for variants in the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain (beta-MHC) and alpha-tropomyosin (alpha-TM) genes. Mutations in the beta-MHC and alpha-TM genes have been reported to be responsible for 30% to 40% and less than 5% of familial HCM cases, respectively. However, most genetic studies have included patients from tertiary care centers and are subject to referral bias. Exons 3-26 and 40 of the beta-MHC gene and the nine exons of the alpha-TM gene were screened with the PCR-SSCP (polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism) method. Linkage analyses between familial HCM locus and two intragenic polymorphic markers (MYO I and MYO II) of the beta-MHC gene were performed in 16 familial HCM kindreds. A previously reported Arg719Trp (arginine converted to tryptophan in codon 719) mutation of the beta-MHC gene was found in one proband and two relatives. In addition, a novel Asn696Ser (asparagine converted to serine in codon 696) substitution was found in one HCM patient. No linkage between familial HCM and the beta-MHC gene was observed in 16 familial kindreds. A previously reported Aspl75Asn (aspartic acid converted to asparagine in codon 175) mutation of the alpha-TM gene was found in four probands and 16 relatives. Mutations in the beta-MHC and alpha-TM genes accounted for 6% and 25% familial HCM cases and 3% and 11% of all cases, respectively. Our results indicate that the beta-MHC gene is not the predominant gene for HCM in the Finnish population, whereas HCM caused by the Aspl75Asn mutation of the a-TM gene is more common than previously reported.",2 4
"Twenty-two novel mutations in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) underscore the genotype-phenotype correlation in glycogen storage disease type II. ||  || Patients with glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII, Pompe disease) suffer from progressive muscle weakness due to acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency. The disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait with a spectrum of clinical phenotypes. We have investigated 29 cases of GSDII and thereby identified 55 pathogenic mutations of the acid alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) encoding acid maltase. There were 34 different mutations identified, 22 of which were novel. All of the missense mutations and two other mutations with an unpredictable effect on acid alpha-glucosidase synthesis and function were transiently expressed in COS cells. The effect of a novel splice-site mutation was investigated by real-time PCR analysis. The outcome of our analysis underscores the notion that the clinical phenotype of GSDII is largely dictated by the nature of the mutations in the GAA alleles. This genotype-phenotype correlation makes DNA analysis a valuable tool to help predict the clinical course of the disease.",2 1 4 0 3
"A cysteine-for-arginine substitution (R614C) in the human skeletal muscle calcium release channel cosegregates with malignant hyperthermia. ||  || A point mutation in the human gene for the skeletal muscle calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor [RYR1]) correlates with inheritance of malignant hyperthermia in a family of Northern European descent. The substitution of thymine for cytosine at position 1840 of the RYR1 transcript results in a cysteine-for-arginine substitution at position 614 (R614C) of the amino acid sequence. The mutation was absent in 59 normal individuals from the general population, in 61 additional unrelated malignant hyperthermia-susceptible patients, and in 18 patients with malignant hyperthermia associated with other inherited or congenital diseases. Together with reports of an equivalent mutation in six susceptible pig strains and an identical mutation in one other human pedigree, these findings suggest that the cysteine-for-arginine mutation represents a shared calcium release channel pathogenesis between porcine malignant hyperthermia and a subset of mutations responsible for the human malignant hyperthermia syndrome.",2
"Late onset variants in Fabry disease: Results in high risk population screenings in Argentina. ||  || Screening for Fabry disease (FD) in high risk populations yields a significant number of individuals with novel, ultra rare genetic variants in the GLA gene, largely without classic manifestations of FD. These variants often have significant residual α-galactosidase A activity. The establishment of the pathogenic character of previously unknown or rare variants is challenging but necessary to guide therapeutic decisions. To present 2 cases of non-classical presentations of FD with renal involvement as well as to discuss the importance of high risk population screenings for FD. Our patients with non-classical variants were diagnosed through FD screenings in dialysis units. However, organ damage was not limited to kidneys, since LVH, vertebrobasilar dolichoectasia and cornea verticillata were also present. Lyso-Gb3 concentrations in plasma were in the pathologic range, compatible with late onset FD. Structural studies and in silico analysis of p.(Cys174Gly) and p.(Arg363His), employing different tools, suggest that enzyme destabilization and possibly aggregation could play a role in organ damage. Screening programs for FD in high risk populations are important as FD is a treatable multisystemic disease which is frequently overlooked in patients who present without classical manifestations.",2
"Subtle abnormalities in contractile function are an early manifestation of sarcomere mutations in dilated cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Cardiomyopathy, Dilated Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Echocardiography Female Genotype Heart Rate Humans Male Middle Aged Myocardial Contraction Phenotype Sarcomeres Ventricular Function, Left Young Adult || Sarcomere mutations cause both dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM); however, the steps leading from mutation to disease are not well described. By studying mutation carriers before a clinical diagnosis develops, we characterize the early manifestations of sarcomere mutations in DCM and investigate how these manifestations differ from sarcomere mutations associated with HCM. Sixty-two genotyped individuals in families with sarcomeric DCM underwent clinical evaluation including strain echocardiography. The group included 12 subclinical DCM mutation carriers with normal cardiac dimensions and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF ≥55%), 21 overt DCM subjects, and 29 related mutation (-) normal controls. Results were compared with a previously characterized cohort of 60 subclinical HCM subjects (sarcomere mutation carriers without left ventricular hypertrophy). Systolic myocardial tissue velocity, longitudinal, circumferential, and radial strain, and longitudinal and radial strain rate were reduced by 10%-23% in subclinical DCM mutation carriers compared with controls (P<0.001 for all comparisons), after adjusting for age and family relations. No significant differences in diastolic parameters were identified comparing the subclinical and control cohorts. The opposite pattern of contractile abnormalities with reduced diastolic but preserved systolic function was seen in subclinical HCM. Subtle abnormalities in systolic function are present in subclinical DCM mutation carriers, despite normal left ventricular size and ejection fraction. In contrast, impaired relaxation and preserved systolic function appear to be the predominant early manifestations of sarcomere mutations that lead to HCM. These findings support the theory that the mutation's intrinsic impact on sarcomere function influences whether a dilated or hypertrophic phenotype develops.",2 4
"Acute myelogenous leukemia in a patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome treated with valproic acid, theophyllamine and all-trans retinoic acid: a case report. || Aminophylline Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols DNA-Binding Proteins Drug Therapy, Combination Female Genes, Tumor Suppressor Humans Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Middle Aged Mutation Nuclear Proteins Treatment Outcome Tretinoin Tumor Protein p73 Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Tumor Suppressor Proteins Valproic Acid || ",2
"Molecular and phenotypic effects of heterozygous, homozygous, and compound heterozygote myosin heavy-chain mutations. || Actins Biopsy Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Family Leave Female Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Male Muscle Contraction Muscle, Skeletal Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Penetrance Phenotype || Autosomal dominant familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) has variable penetrance and phenotype. Heterozygous mutations in MYH7 encoding beta-myosin heavy chain are the most common causes of FHC, and we proposed that ""enhanced"" mutant actin-myosin function is the causative molecular abnormality. We have studied individuals from families in which members have two, one, or no mutant MYH7 alleles to examine for dose effects. In one family, a member homozygous for Lys207Gln had cardiomyopathy complicated by left ventricular dilatation, systolic impairment, atrial fibrillation, and defibrillator interventions. Only one of five heterozygous relatives had FHC. Leu908Val and Asp906Gly mutations were detected in a second family in which penetrance for Leu908Val heterozygotes was 46% (21/46) and 25% (3/12) for Asp906Gly. Despite the low penetrance, hypertrophy was severe in several heterozygotes. Two individuals with both mutations developed severe FHC. The velocities of actin translocation (V(actin)) by mutant and wild-type (WT) myosins were compared in the in vitro motility assay. Compared with WT/WT, V(actin) was 34% faster for WT/D906G and 21% for WT/L908V. Surprisingly V(actin) for Leu908Val/Asp906Gly and Lys207Gln/Lys207Gln mutants were similar to WT. The apparent enhancement of mechanical performance with mutant/WT myosin was not observed for mutant/mutant myosin. This suggests that V(actin) may be a poor predictor of disease penetrance or severity and that power production may be more appropriate, or that the limited availability of double mutant patients prohibits any definitive conclusions. Finally, severe FHC in heterozygous individuals can occur despite very low penetrance, suggesting these mutations alone are insufficient to cause FHC and that uncharacterized modifying mechanisms exert powerful influences.",2 4
"Cranial, axial and proximal myopathy and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by a mutation in the globular head region of the MYH7 gene. || Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Female Humans Middle Aged Muscular Diseases Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains || ",2
"Galactosidase Alpha p.A143T Variant Fabry Disease May Result in a Phenotype With Multifocal Microvascular Cerebral Involvement at a Young Age. ||  || A 16-year-old male presented with episodic headaches and a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that showed multifocal punctate to patchy white matter lesions. The diagnosis of Fabry disease (FD) was suggested upon the finding of significantly reduced plasma alpha-galactosidase A activity (0.62 µmol/L or 13% of normal; normal range ≥ 1.65 μmol/L) and genetic investigation confirmed the presence of a hemizygous missense variant in the galactosidase alpha (GLA) gene (p.A143T). Baseline assessment of other systemic involvement showed only a discrete proteinuria. FD is a rare lysosomal storage disorder. Genetic screening studies have revealed over 600 variants in the GLA gene. The p.A143T variant is a genetic variant of unknown significance, with its associated phenotype ranging from classical FD to healthy unaffected patients. Some authors, however, deem this variant non-pathogenic. We describe the case of a 16-year-old male with multifocal white matter lesions on brain MRI, who was diagnosed with FD and carried this genetic variant. The causative p.A143T mutation can be associated with a more severe subclinical phenotype than has been reported to date. Furthermore, a diagnosis of FD should be considered when finding asymptomatic cerebral white matter lesions in a young patient.",2 0
"PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome and Gorham-Stout phenomenon. || Family Fatal Outcome Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Heterozygote Humans Infant Male Osteolysis, Essential PTEN Phosphohydrolase || PTEN: hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS) is a group of syndromes caused by mutations in PTEN. Gorham-Stout phenomenon (GSP) is a rare condition characterized by proliferation of vascular structures in bones, resulting in progressive osteolysis. Here we present a 1-year-old boy with PHTS and GSP. The lesion that later proved to be GSP was evident from the age of 4 months, and became symptomatic at the age of 1 year. Eventually, he developed a fatal chylothorax. Mutation analysis revealed a germline heterozygous mutation c.517 C>T (p.Arg173Cys) in exon 6 of PTEN. Analysis of the lymphatic malformation (LM) tissue revealed no loss of heterozygosity (LOH) nor a second, somatic PTEN mutation of the remaining wild type allele. The germline p.Arg173Cys mutation was also present in the mother and the propositus' younger sister and brother. Further molecular work-up showed a heterozygous variant c.2180C>T (p.Ala727Val) FLT4 in the LM tissue, which was also present in the germline of mother and two siblings. GSP has not been reported before in a patient with a PTEN mutation. Up to this date, this mutation is the only genetic defect possibly involved in the etiology of GSP which is plausible given the known function of PTEN in angiogenic signaling.",2 3
"Whole-exome sequencing identifies USH2A mutations in a pseudo-dominant Usher syndrome family. || Exome Extracellular Matrix Proteins Family Female Genome-Wide Association Study High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Mutation Pedigree Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome (USH) is an autosomal recessive (AR) multi-sensory degenerative disorder leading to deaf-blindness. USH is clinically subdivided into three subclasses, and 10 genes have been identified thus far. Clinical and genetic heterogeneities in USH make a precise diagnosis difficult. A dominant‑like USH family in successive generations was identified, and the present study aimed to determine the genetic predisposition of this family. Whole‑exome sequencing was performed in two affected patients and an unaffected relative. Systematic data were analyzed by bioinformatic analysis to remove the candidate mutations via step‑wise filtering. Direct Sanger sequencing and co‑segregation analysis were performed in the pedigree. One novel and two known mutations in the USH2A gene were identified, and were further confirmed by direct sequencing and co‑segregation analysis. The affected mother carried compound mutations in the USH2A gene, while the unaffected father carried a heterozygous mutation. The present study demonstrates that whole‑exome sequencing is a robust approach for the molecular diagnosis of disorders with high levels of genetic heterogeneity.",2 1
"Prevalence of Fabry disease in a predominantly hypertensive population with left ventricular hypertrophy. || Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over DNA Mutational Analysis Dried Blood Spot Testing Fabry Disease Female Humans Hypertension Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular Male Middle Aged Pedigree Prevalence Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Patients with Fabry disease (FD) develop progressive left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). In screening studies in patients with LVH, the prevalence of FD ranges from 0 to 12%. This variability is attributable to different factors like diverging inclusion and exclusion criteria, the evaluation of selected populations and suboptimal screening methods. In this study, we aimed to determine the prevalence of FD in an unselected population of everyday clinical practice presenting LVH, defined as a maximal end-diastolic septal or posterior wall thickness ≥ 13 mm, without exclusion of patients with arterial hypertension or valvular pathology, and using optimal screening methods. In adult males, a two-tier approach was used; α-Galactosidase A (aGAL A) activity was measured using a dried bloodspot test (DBS) and diagnosis was confirmed by mutation analysis of the GLA gene. In females, mutation analysis was the primary screening tool. 362 men and 178 women were screened. Six patients were diagnosed with a genetic sequence alteration of the GLA gene. One man had a novel mutation, GLA p.Ala5Glu (c.44C>A), presenting as classical FD. Another man and three women had the previously described GLA p.Ala143Thr (c.427G>A) mutation, which generally presents as an attenuated phenotype. One woman had a novel sequence alteration c.639+6A>C, which appeared to be a polymorphism. All true Fabry patients had arterial hypertension (AHT), and one had hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM). In a group of unselected patients with LVH, we found a prevalence of Fabry disease of 0.9%. AHT or type of hypertrophy should not be an exclusion criterion for screening for FD.",2
"Reduced penetrance of autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia in a high percentage of families: importance of genetic testing in the entire family. || Adolescent Adult Aged Animals Apolipoprotein B-100 Apolipoproteins B COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops Child Cholesterol, LDL Family Health Female Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutagenesis Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Sequence Analysis, DNA Serine Endopeptidases Spain || Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemias (ADHs) are characterised by increased plasma levels of total and LDL cholesterol, predisposing to premature atherosclerosis. ADHs comprise several diseases with undistinguishable phenotype, caused by mutations in different genes: LDLR, APOB and PCSK9. Genetic studies are usually performed in patients with altered cholesterol levels. However, some persons carrying pathogenic mutations are normocholesterolemic and there are no further studies about this subject. We have studied the frequency of families and individuals carrying ADH mutations who do not present the disease in Spanish population. We have analysed genes known to cause ADH by direct sequencing in 24 ADH families (215 members). Functional effect of some LDLR gene mutations was assessed by transfecting cultured cells with plasmids. Six families with mutations presented 7 mutation carriers who did not show ADH phenotype: 30% of ADH families presented normocholesterolemic individuals, and 7% of carriers of pathogenic mutations did not show ADH phenotype. We have analysed the effect of some of these mutations and they are responsible for impaired LDL receptor function. We have excluded mutations in APOB and PCSK9 genes that could reduce LDLc levels. An important percentage of ADH families presented individuals who do not show an ADH phenotype, but who are able to transmit the pathogenic mutation to their offspring. Genetic study of all subjects in ADH families should be performed in order to identify normocholesterolemic carriers that allow the detection of mutations in their descendants and the prevention of the disease consequences.",2 4
"Molecular analysis of the PDS gene in Pendred syndrome. || DNA Mutational Analysis DNA, Complementary Female Genes Goiter Haplotypes Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Loss of Heterozygosity Male Mutation Pedigree Syndrome Thyroid Gland || Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by the association between sensorineural hearing loss and thyroid swelling or goitre and is likely to be the most common form of syndromic deafness. Within the thyroid gland of affected individuals, iodide is incompletely organified with variable effects upon thyroid hormone biosynthesis, whilst the molecular basis of the hearing loss is unknown. The PDS gene has been identified by positional cloning of chromosome 7q31, within the Pendred syndrome critical linkage interval and encodes for a putative ion transporter called pendrin. We have investigated a cohort of 56 kindreds, all with features suggestive of a diagnosis of Pendred syndrome. Molecular analysis of the PDS gene identified 47 of the 60 (78%) mutant alleles in 31 families (includes three homozygous consanguineous kindreds and one extended family segregating three mutant alleles). Moreover, four recurrent mutations accounted for 35 (74%) of PDS disease chromosomes detected and haplotype analysis would favour common founders rather than mutational hotspots within the PDS gene. Whilst these findings demonstrate molecular heterogeneity for PDS mutations associated with Pendred syndrome, this study would support the use of molecular analysis of the PDS gene in the assessment of families with congenital hearing loss.",2
"T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia arising from familial platelet disorder. || Adult Blood Platelet Disorders Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit Family Female Humans Mutation Precursor T-Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma Translocation, Genetic || Familial platelet disorder (FPD) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder which causes moderate thrombocytopenia with or without impaired platelet function. Patients have a propensity to develop acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and various types of second hits have been postulated in the evolution to AML. However, only a few cases of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) have been reported thus far. Here, we report a family of FPD with a germ-line hemi-allelic mutation R174X in the RUNX1 gene. The proband of the family developed AML and her son had ALL of the T cell lineage. The balanced translocation t(1;7)(p34.1;q22) was detected in the lymphoblasts from the patient with ALL. This translocation was not seen in any other affected members of the family or in the bone marrow sample of this patient in complete remission. Taken together, t(1;7)(p34.1;q22) is thought to be one of the somatic second hits that predisposes FPD to acute leukemia with T cell phenotype.",2 4
Phenylalanine hydroxylase gene: a novel splice mutation in intron 2 in two German and Polish families with severe phenylketonuria. ||  || ,2 1 3
"Unravelling the pathogenic role and genotype-phenotype correlation of the USH2A p.(Cys759Phe) variant among Spanish families. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Amino Acid Substitution Blindness Extracellular Matrix Proteins Genetic Association Studies Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Kaplan-Meier Estimate Middle Aged Retinitis Pigmentosa Spain Usher Syndromes || Mutations in USH2A cause both isolated Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) and Usher syndrome (that implies RP and hearing impairment). One of the most frequent variants identified in this gene and among these patients is the p.(Cys759Phe) change. However, the pathogenic role of this allele has been questioned since it was found in homozygosity in two healthy siblings of a Spanish family. To assess the causative role of USH2A p.(Cys759Phe) in autosomal recessive RP (ARRP) and Usher syndrome type II (USH2) and to establish possible genotype-phenotype correlations associated with p.(Cys759Phe), we performed a comprehensive genetic and clinical study in patients suffering from any of the two above-mentioned diseases and carrying at least one p.(Cys759Phe) allele. Diagnosis was set according to previously reported protocols. Genetic analyses were performed by using classical molecular and Next-Generation Sequencing approaches. Probands of 57 unrelated families were molecularly studied and 63 patients belonging to these families were phenotypically evaluated. Molecular analysis characterized 100% of the cases, identifying: 11 homozygous patients for USH2A p.(Cys759Phe), 42 compound heterozygous patients (12 of them with another missense USH2A pathogenic variant and 30 with a truncating USH2A variant), and 4 patients carrying the p.(Cys759Phe) allele and a pathogenic variant in another RP gene (PROM1, CNGB1 or RP1). No additional causative variants were identified in symptomatic homozygous patients. Statistical analysis of clinical differences between zygosity states yielded differences (p≤0.05) in age at diagnosis of RP and hypoacusis, and progression of visual field loss. Homozygosity of p.(Cys759Phe) and compound heterozygosity with another USH2A missense variant is associated with ARRP or ARRP plus late onset hypoacusis (OR = 20.62, CI = 95%, p = 0.041). The present study supports the role of USH2A p.(Cys759Phe) in ARRP and USH2 pathogenesis, and demonstrates the clinical differences between different zygosity states. Phenotype-genotype correlations may guide the genetic characterization based upon specific clinical signs and may advise on the clinical management and prognosis based upon a specific genotype.",2 1 4
"Short communication: the cardiac myosin binding protein C Arg502Trp mutation: a common cause of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Child Child, Preschool Humans Infant Middle Aged Point Mutation Young Adult || The myosin-binding protein C isoform 3 (MYBPC3) variant Arg502Trp has been identified in multiple hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) cases, but compelling evidence to support or refute the pathogenicity of this variant is lacking. To determine the prevalence, origin and clinical significance of the MYBPC3 Arg502Trp variant. The prevalence of MYBPC3 Arg502Trp was ascertained in 1414 sequential HCM patients of primarily European descent. MYBPC3 Arg502Trp was identified in 34 of these 1414 unrelated HCM patients. Segregation of MYBPC3 Arg502Trp with clinical status was assessed in family members. Disease haplotypes were examined in 17 families using two loci flanking MYBPC3. Family studies identified an additional 43 variant carriers, many with manifest disease, yielding a calculated odds ratio of 11 000:1 for segregation of MYBPC3 Arg502Trp with HCM. Analyses in 17 families showed at least 4 independent haplotypes flanked MYBPC3 Arg502Trp. Eight individuals (4 probands and 4 family members) also had another sarcomere protein gene mutation. Major adverse clinical events occurred in approximately 30% of MYBPC3 Arg502Trp carriers by age 50; these were significantly more likely (P<0.0001) when another sarcomere mutation was present. MYBPC3 Arg502Trp is the most common and recurrent pathogenic mutation in a diverse primarily European descent HCM cohort, occurring in 2.4% of patients. MYBPC3 Arg502Trp conveys a 340-fold increased risk for HCM by 45 years of age, when more than 50% of carriers have overt disease. HCM prognosis worsens when MYBPC3 Arg502Trp occurs in the setting of another sarcomere protein gene mutation.",2
"LEOPARD syndrome: clinical dilemmas in differential diagnosis of RASopathies. || Child Diagnosis, Differential Echocardiography Facies Heterozygote Humans LEOPARD Syndrome Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Middle Aged Mutation Neurofibromatoses Noonan Syndrome Phenotype Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 || Diagnosis within RASopathies still represents a challenge. Nevertheless, many efforts have been made by clinicians to identify specific clinical features which might help in differentiating one disorder from another. Here, we describe a child initially diagnosed with Neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome. The follow-up of the proband, the clinical evaluation of his father together with a gene-by-gene testing approach led us to the proper diagnosis. We report a 8-year-old male with multiple café-au-lait macules, several lentigines and dysmorphic features that suggest Noonan syndrome initially diagnosed with Neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome. However, after a few years of clinical and ophthalmological follow-up, the absence of typical features of Neurofibromatosis type 1 and the lack of NF1 mutation led us to reconsider the original diagnosis. A new examination of the patient and his similarly affected father, who was initially referred as healthy, led us to suspect LEOPARD syndrome, The diagnosis was then confirmed by the occurrence in both patients of a heterozygous mutation c.1403 C > T, p.(Thr468Met), of PTPN11. Subsequently, the proband was also found to have type-1 Arnold-Chiari malformation in association with syringomyelia. Our experience suggests that differential clinical diagnosis among RASopathies remains ambiguous and raises doubts on the current diagnostic clinical criteria. In some cases, genetic tests represent the only conclusive proof for a correct diagnosis and, consequently, for establishing individual prognosis and providing adequate follow-up. Thus, molecular testing represents an essential tool in differential diagnosis of RASophaties. This view is further strengthened by the increasing accessibility of new sequencing techniques.Finally, to our knowledge, the described case represents the third report of the occurrence of Arnold Chiari malformation and the second description of syringomyelia with LEOPARD syndrome.",2 4
"KCNQ4, a novel potassium channel expressed in sensory outer hair cells, is mutated in dominant deafness. || Amino Acid Sequence Animals Chromosome Mapping Cloning, Molecular DNA, Complementary Ear, Inner Female Gene Expression Regulation Genes, Dominant Hair Cells, Auditory, Outer Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans KCNQ Potassium Channels Mice Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Oocytes Pedigree Potassium Channels Potassium Channels, Voltage-Gated Xenopus laevis || Potassium channels regulate electrical signaling and the ionic composition of biological fluids. Mutations in the three known genes of the KCNQ branch of the K+ channel gene family underlie inherited cardiac arrhythmias (in some cases associated with deafness) and neonatal epilepsy. We have now cloned KCNQ4, a novel member of this branch. It maps to the DFNA2 locus for a form of nonsyndromic dominant deafness. In the cochlea, it is expressed in sensory outer hair cells. A mutation in this gene in a DFNA2 pedigree changes a residue in the KCNQ4 pore region. It abolishes the potassium currents of wild-type KCNQ4 on which it exerts a strong dominant-negative effect. Whereas mutations in KCNQ1 cause deafness by affecting endolymph secretion, the mechanism leading to KCNQ4-related hearing loss is intrinsic to outer hair cells.",2 4 0
"Transcriptional functionality of germ line p53 mutants influences cancer phenotype. || Adolescent Adult Aged Child Genes, p53 Germ-Line Mutation Humans Middle Aged Mutation Neoplasms Phenotype Precancerous Conditions Transcription, Genetic Transcriptional Activation Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || The TP53 tumor suppressor gene encodes a sequence-specific transcription factor that is able to transactivate several sets of genes, the promoters of which include appropriate response elements. Although human cancers frequently contain mutated p53, the alleles as well as the clinical expression are often heterogeneous. Germ line mutations of TP53 result in cancer proneness syndromes known as Li-Fraumeni, Li-Fraumeni--like, and nonsyndromic predisposition with or without family history. p53 mutants can be classified as partial deficiency alleles or severe deficiency alleles depending on their ability to transactivate a set of human target sequences, as measured using a standardized yeast-based assay (see http://www.umd.be:2072/index.html). We have investigated the extent to which the functional features of p53 mutant alleles determine clinical features in patients who have inherited these alleles and have developed cancer. We retrieved clinical data from the IARC database (see http://www.p53.iarc.fr/Germline.html) for all cancer patients with germ line p53 mutations and applied stringent statistical evaluations to compare the functional classification of p53 alleles with clinical phenotypes. Our analyses reveal that partial deficiency alleles are associated with a milder family history (P = 0.007), a lower numbers of tumors (P = 0.007), and a delayed disease onset (median, 31 versus 15 years; P = 0.007) which could be related to distinct tumor spectra. These findings establish for the first time significant correlations between the residual transactivation function of individual TP53 alleles and clinical variables in patients with inherited p53 mutations who develop cancer.",2 4
"Medical sequencing at the extremes of human body mass. || Adult Body Weight Exons Female Gene Frequency Genes Genetic Variation Humans Male Middle Aged Obesity Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Sequence Analysis, DNA || Body weight is a quantitative trait with significant heritability in humans. To identify potential genetic contributors to this phenotype, we resequenced the coding exons and splice junctions of 58 genes in 379 obese and 378 lean individuals. Our 96-Mb survey included 21 genes associated with monogenic forms of obesity in humans or mice, as well as 37 genes that function in body weight-related pathways. We found that the monogenic obesity-associated gene group was enriched for rare nonsynonymous variants unique to the obese population compared with the lean population. In addition, computational analysis predicted a greater fraction of deleterious variants within the obese cohort. Together, these data suggest that multiple rare alleles contribute to obesity in the population and provide a medical sequencing-based approach to detect them.",2 4
"Mutations in GCK and HNF-1alpha explain the majority of cases with clinical diagnosis of MODY in Spain. || Adolescent Blood Glucose Child DNA Mutational Analysis Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Genotype Glucokinase Glucose Tolerance Test Haplotypes Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta Humans Insulin Resistance Male Obesity Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Spain || The aim of this study was to group patients with MODY (maturity-onset diabetes of the young) according to the genetic alterations underlying the disease and to investigate their clinical characteristics. Molecular analysis of GCK (MODY2), HNF-1alpha (MODY3), HNF-4alpha (MODY1) and HNF-1beta (MODY5) genes was performed by DNA sequencing in 95 unrelated index probands (47M/48F; mean age 9.9 +/- 5.2 years) with clinical diagnosis of MODY. After classification into MODY subtypes according to the genetic alterations, clinical characteristics were compared between the groups. Seventy-six families were shown to carry mutations in GCK (34 of them previously unreported), eight families presented HNF-1alpha mutations, and a large genomic rearrangement in HNF-1beta was found in a family. No alteration was found in HNF-4alpha. Thus, relative frequencies in the group studied were 80% MODY2, 8.5% MODY3 and 1% MODY5. Comparison of clinical parameters according to genetic status showed significant differences between MODY2 and MODY3 patients in age at diagnosis (9.4 +/- 5.4 years vs. 12.7 +/- 4.6 years), diagnosis (impaired glucose tolerance vs. diabetes), diagnostic test used (OGTT vs. fasting glucose), treatment (diet and exercise vs. insulin/oral antidiabetic agents) and birth weight (2.96 +/- 0.44 kg vs. 3.40 +/- 0.67 kg). Almost 90% of the MODY cases in the group studied are explained by mutations in the major genes GCK (MODY2) and HNF-1alpha(MODY3), although differences in the relative prevalence of each form could be partly due to patient referral bias (paediatric vs. adult). In general, patients with MODY2 were diagnosed at an earlier age in life than MODY3 patients and had a milder form of diabetes. Moreover, the majority of patients with MODY2 mutations were treated with diet whereas half of MODY3 patients received pharmacological treatment.",2 4
"A substitution of cysteine for arginine 614 in the ryanodine receptor is potentially causative of human malignant hyperthermia. || Adolescent Amino Acid Sequence Arginine Base Sequence Caffeine Cloning, Molecular Cysteine European Continental Ancestry Group Exons Female Halothane Humans Male Malignant Hyperthermia Molecular Sequence Data Muscle Proteins Mutation Oligodeoxyribonucleotides Polymerase Chain Reaction Receptors, Cholinergic Restriction Mapping Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel || Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a devastating, potentially lethal response to anesthetics that occurs in genetically predisposed individuals. The skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene has been linked to porcine and human MH. Furthermore, a Cys for Arg substitution tightly linked to, and potentially causative of, porcine MH has been identified in the ryanodine receptor. Analysis of 35 human families predisposed to malignant hyperthermia has revealed the presence, and cosegregation with phenotype, of the corresponding substitution in a single family. This substitution, by analogy to the findings in pig, may be causal for predisposition to MH in this family.",2
"Genomic analysis of inherited breast cancer among Palestinian women: Genetic heterogeneity and a founder mutation in TP53. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Arabs Breast Neoplasms Female Genetic Association Studies Genetic Heterogeneity Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Sequence Analysis, DNA Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Breast cancer among Palestinian women has lower incidence than in Europe or North America, yet is very frequently familial. We studied genetic causes of this familial clustering in a consecutive hospital-based series of 875 Palestinian patients with invasive breast cancer, including 453 women with diagnosis by age 40, or with breast or ovarian cancer in a mother, sister, grandmother or aunt (""discovery series""); and 422 women diagnosed after age 40 and with negative family history (""older-onset sporadic patient series""). Genomic DNA from women in the discovery series was sequenced for all known breast cancer genes, revealing a pathogenic mutation in 13% (61/453) of patients. These mutations were screened in all patients and in 300 Palestinian female controls, revealing 1.0% (4/422) carriers among older, nonfamilial patients and two carriers among controls. The mutational spectrum was highly heterogeneous, including pathogenic mutations in 11 different genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, ATM, CHEK2, BARD1, BRIP1, PALB2, MRE11A, PTEN and XRCC2. BRCA1 carriers were significantly more likely than other patients to have triple negative tumors (p = 0.03). The single most frequent mutation was TP53 p.R181C, which was significantly enriched in the discovery series compared to controls (p = 0.01) and was responsible for 15% of breast cancers among young onset or familial patients. TP53 p.R181C predisposed specifically to breast cancer with incomplete penetrance, and not to other Li-Fraumeni cancers. Palestinian women with young onset or familial breast cancer and their families would benefit from genetic analysis and counseling.",2 4
"CDH1 associated gastric cancer: a report of a family and review of the literature. || Cadherins Female Gastrectomy Genetic Counseling Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Population Surveillance Stomach Neoplasms || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is an autosomal-dominant inherited form of gastric cancer associated with inactivating germline mutations in the CDH1 gene. We set out to outline the role of CDH1 in HDGC. Investigation of a family suspected as having HDGC is discussed. The role of surgery in the management of affected individuals is then examined. A search was conducted of Medline and the National Library of Medicine to identify key articles concerning CDH1 gene mutations, familial gastric cancer and gastrectomy. Further, relevant articles were obtained by manual scanning of the reference lists of identified papers. Mutation-specific CDH1 genetic testing was performed on six living family members and on gastric tissue obtained from two deceased members. CDH1 mutations cause inactivation of the cell adhesion protein E-cadherin. Carriers of the CDH1 germline gene mutation develop an aggressive, diffuse, submucosal gastric cancer at an early age. Current endoscopic screening is ineffective at detecting HDGC. The presence of a CDH1 germline gene mutation was confirmed in both deceased family members and also in four of the six living members tested. Genetic counselling and CDH1 gene mutation testing is indicated in families with suspected HDGC. In the absence of a satisfactory surveillance mechanism, prophylactic total gastrectomy would appear to be an appropriate therapeutic option in mutation carriers.",2 4
"Mutation spectrum in a large cohort of unrelated consecutive patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adult Aged Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Chromosome Mapping Cohort Studies Female Gene Components Genetic Testing Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Sarcomeres Sequence Analysis, DNA Troponin || Defects in nine sarcomeric protein genes are known to cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Mutation types and frequencies in large cohorts of consecutive and unrelated patients have not yet been determined. We, therefore, screened HCM patients for mutations in six sarcomeric genes: myosin-binding protein C3 (MYBPC3), MYH7, cardiac troponin T (TNNT2), alpha-tropomyosin (TPM1), cardiac troponin I (TNNI3), and cardiac troponin C (TNNC1). HCM was diagnosed in 108 consecutive patients by echocardiography (septum >15 mm, septal/posterior wall >1.3 mm), angiography, or based on a state after myectomy. Single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis was used for mutation screening, followed by DNA-sequencing. A total of 34 different mutations were identified in 108 patients: 18 mutations in MYBPC3 in 20 patients [intervening sequence (intron) 7 + 1G > A and Q1233X were found twice], 13 missense mutations in MYH7 in 14 patients (R807H was found twice), and one amino acid change in TPM1, TNNT2, and TNNI3, respectively. No disease-causing mutation was found in TNNC1. Cosegregation with the HCM phenotype could be demonstrated for 13 mutations (eight mutations in MYBPC3 and five mutations in MYH7). Twenty-eight of the 37 mutation carriers (76%) reported a positive family history with at least one affected first-grade relative; only eight mutations occurred sporadically (22%). MYBPC3 was the gene that most frequently caused HCM in our population. Systematic mutation screening in large samples of HCM patients leads to a genetic diagnosis in about 30% of unrelated index patients and in about 57% of patients with a positive family history.",2 4
"Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Microsatellite haplotyping and identification of a hot spot for mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Amino Acid Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Cause of Death Child Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 DNA, Satellite Exons Female Genetic Linkage Genetic Markers Haplotypes Humans Lod Score Male Middle Aged Myosins Nucleic Acid Heteroduplexes Pedigree Point Mutation Recombination, Genetic Repetitive Sequences, Nucleic Acid || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease. The first identified disease gene, located on chromosome 14q11-q12, encodes the beta-myosin heavy chain. We have performed linkage analysis of two French FHC pedigrees, 720 and 730, with two microsatellite markers located in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene (MYO I and MYO II) and with four highly informative markers, recently mapped to chromosome 14q11-q12. Significant linkage was found with MYO I and MYO II in pedigree 720, but results were not conclusive for pedigree 730. Haplotype analysis of the six markers allowed identification of affected individuals and of some unaffected subjects carrying the disease gene. Two novel missense mutations were identified in exon 13 by direct sequencing, 403Arg-->Leu and 403Arg-->Trp in families 720 and 730, respectively. The 403Arg-->Leu mutation was associated with incomplete penetrance, a high incidence of sudden deaths and severe cardiac events, whereas the consequences of the 403Arg-->Trp mutation appeared less severe. Haplotyping of polymorphic markers in close linkage to the beta-myosin heavy chain gene can, thus, provide rapid analysis of non informative pedigrees and rapid detection of carrier status. Our results also indicate that codon 403 of the beta-myosin heavy chain gene is a hot spot for mutations causing FHC.",2 4
"Sacral agenesis: a pilot whole exome sequencing and copy number study. || Abnormalities, Multiple Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Clathrin Heavy Chains DNA DNA Copy Number Variations High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Homozygote Humans Meningocele Neoplasm Proteins Phenotype Pilot Projects Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Sacrococcygeal Region Sequence Analysis, DNA || Caudal regression syndrome (CRS) or sacral agenesis is a rare congenital disorder characterized by a constellation of congenital caudal anomalies affecting the caudal spine and spinal cord, the hindgut, the urogenital system, and the lower limbs. CRS is a complex condition, attributed to an abnormal development of the caudal mesoderm, likely caused by the effect of interacting genetic and environmental factors. A well-known risk factor is maternal type 1 diabetes. Whole exome sequencing and copy number variation (CNV) analyses were conducted on 4 Caucasian trios to identify de novo and inherited rare mutations. In this pilot study, exome sequencing and copy number variation (CNV) analyses implicate a number of candidate genes, including SPTBN5, MORN1, ZNF330, CLTCL1 and PDZD2. De novo mutations were found in SPTBN5, MORN1 and ZNF330 and inherited predicted damaging mutations in PDZD2 (homozygous) and CLTCL1 (compound heterozygous). Importantly, predicted damaging mutations in PTEN (heterozygous), in its direct regulator GLTSCR2 (compound heterozygous) and in VANGL1 (heterozygous) were identified. These genes had previously been linked with the CRS phenotype. Two CNV deletions, one de novo (chr3q13.13) and one homozygous (chr8p23.2), were detected in one of our CRS patients. These deletions overlapped with CNVs previously reported in patients with similar phenotype. Despite the genetic diversity and the complexity of the phenotype, this pilot study identified genetic features common across CRS patients.",2 3
"In vitro analyses of known and novel RUNX1/AML1 mutations in dominant familial platelet disorder with predisposition to acute myelogenous leukemia: implications for mechanisms of pathogenesis. || Blood Platelet Disorders Chromosomes, Human, Pair 21 Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA Mutational Analysis DNA-Binding Proteins Family Health Female Genes, Dominant Genetic Linkage Genetic Predisposition to Disease Haplotypes Humans Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute Male Pedigree Point Mutation Protein Binding Proto-Oncogene Proteins Transcription Factor AP-2 Transcription Factors Transcriptional Activation || Familial platelet disorder with predisposition to acute myelogenous leukemia (FPD/AML) is an autosomal dominant familial platelet disorder characterized by thrombocytopenia and a propensity to develop AML. Mutation analyses of RUNX1 in 3 families with FPD/AML showing linkage to chromosome 21q22.1 revealed 3 novel heterozygous point mutations (K83E, R135fsX177 (IVS4 + 3delA), and Y260X). Functional investigations of the 7 FPD/AML RUNX1 Runt domain point mutations described to date (2 frameshift, 2 nonsense, and 3 missense mutations) were performed. Consistent with the position of the mutations in the Runt domain at the RUNX1-DNA interface, DNA binding of all mutant RUNX1 proteins was absent or significantly decreased. In general, missense and nonsense RUNX1 proteins retained the ability to heterodimerize with PEBP2beta/CBFbeta and inhibited transactivation of a reporter gene by wild-type RUNX1. Colocalization of mutant RUNX1 and PEBP2beta/CBFbeta in the cytoplasm was observed. These results suggest that the sequestration of PEBP2beta/CBFbeta by mutant RUNX1 may cause the inhibitory effects. While haploinsufficiency of RUNX1 causes FPD/AML in some families (deletions and frameshifts), mutant RUNX1 proteins (missense and nonsense) may also inhibit wild-type RUNX1, possibly creating a higher propensity to develop leukemia. This is consistent with the hypothesis that a second mutation has to occur, either in RUNX1 or another gene, to cause leukemia among individuals harboring RUNX1 FPD/AML mutations and that the propensity to acquire these additional mutations is determined, at least partially, by the initial RUNX1 mutation.",2 4 0
"RHBDF2 mutations are associated with tylosis, a familial esophageal cancer syndrome. || Amino Acid Sequence Carcinoma, Squamous Cell Cell Growth Processes Cell Movement Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17 ErbB Receptors Esophageal Neoplasms Exons Humans Keratinocytes Keratoderma, Palmoplantar, Diffuse Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense Pedigree Phenotype Sequence Alignment Serine Proteases Untranslated Regions || Tylosis esophageal cancer (TOC) is an autosomal-dominant syndrome characterized by palmoplantar keratoderma, oral precursor lesions, and a high lifetime risk of esophageal cancer. We have previously localized the TOC locus to a small genomic interval within chromosomal region 17q25. Using a targeted capture array and next-generation sequencing, we have now identified missense mutations (c.557T>C [p.Ile186Thr] and c.566C>T [p.Pro189Leu] in RHBDF2, which encodes the inactive rhomboid protease RHBDF2 (also known as iRhom2), as the underlying cause of TOC. We show that the distribution of RHBDF2 in tylotic skin is altered in comparison with that in normal skin, and immortalized tylotic keratinocytes have decreased levels of total epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and display an increased proliferative and migratory potential relative to normal cells, even when normal cells are stimulated with exogenous epidermal growth factor. It would thus appear that EGFR signaling is dysregulated in tylotic cells. Furthermore, we also show an altered localization of RHBDF2 in both tylotic and sporadic squamous esophageal tumors. The elucidation of a role of RHBDF2 in growth-factor signaling in esophageal cancer will help to determine whether targeting this pathway in chemotherapy for this and other squamous cell carcinomas will be effective.",2 4
"Single-strand conformation polymorphism for detection of mutations and base substitutions in phenylketonuria. || Base Sequence DNA DNA, Single-Stranded Exons Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic || In the past few years, more than 20 different mutations have been reported in hyperphenylalaninemias. In southwestern Europe and Mediterranean countries, however, the mutant genotypes reported account for only a fraction (27%) of all mutant alleles at the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) locus, and most of the mutations causing the disease remain unknown. In order to develop a strategy for rapid detection of mutation-containing exons, we applied the single-strand conformation-polymorphism (SSCP) technique to exons 3, 5, 7, and 12 of the PAH gene. We observed five abnormal patterns of migration in mutant PAH genes, and we consistently found base substitutions in the corresponding exons, with no false-positive results. By this procedure, two novel putative mutations were detected in the seventh exon of the PAH gene, (A259V and Y277D) and we were able to demonstrate that the delta I94, R158Q, R408W, and E280K mutations were easily detectable by the SSCP technique. This procedure is therefore of particular interest for rapid detection of mutation-containing exons and for determination of further genotype-phenotype correlations in hyperphenylalaninemias.",2 1 3
"Prognostic implications of novel beta cardiac myosin heavy chain gene mutations that cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 DNA Primers Female Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Myocardium Myosins Pedigree Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Prognosis Sequence Deletion Survival Analysis Survival Rate || Three novel beta cardiac myosin heavy chain (MHC) gene missense mutations, Phe513Cys, Gly716Arg, and Arg719Trp, which cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) are described. One mutation in exon 15 (Phe513Cys) does not alter the charge of the encoded amino acid, and affected family members have a near normal life expectancy. The Gly716Arg mutation (exon 19; charge change of +1) causes FHC in three family members, one of whom underwent transplantation for heart failure. The Arg719Trp mutation (exon 19; charge change of -1) was found in four unrelated FHC families with a high incidence of premature death and an average life expectancy in affected individuals of 38 yr. A comparable high frequency of disease-related deaths in four families with the Arg719Trp mutation suggests that this specific gene defect directly accounts for the observed malignant phenotype. Further, the significantly different life expectancies associated with the Arg719Trp vs. Phe513Cys mutation (P < 0.001) support the hypothesis that mutations which alter the charge of the encoded amino acid affect survival more significantly than those that produce a conservative amino acid change.",2 4
"Five new pedigrees with inherited RUNX1 mutations causing familial platelet disorder with propensity to myeloid malignancy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Blood Platelet Disorders Child Contraindications Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA Mutational Analysis Disease Progression Family Female Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation Humans Leukemia, Myeloid Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Young Adult || Familial platelet disorder with propensity to myeloid malignancy (FPD/AML) is an autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by platelet abnormalities and a predisposition to myelodysplasia (MDS) and/or acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The disorder, caused by inherited mutations in RUNX1, is uncommon with only 14 pedigrees reported. We screened 10 families with a history of more than one first degree relative with MDS/AML for inherited mutations in RUNX1. Germ- line RUNX1 mutations were identified in 5 pedigrees with a 3:2 predominance of N-terminal mutations. Several affected members had normal platelet counts or platelet function, features not previously reported in FPD/AML. The median incidence of MDS/AML among carriers of RUNX1 mutation was 35%. Individual treatments varied but included hematopoietic stem cell transplantation from siblings before recognition of the inherited leukemogenic mutation. Transplantation was associated with a high incidence of complications including early relapse, failure of engraftment, and posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorder. Given the small size of modern families and the clinical heterogeneity of this syndrome, the diagnosis of FPD/AML could be easily overlooked and may be more prevalent than previously recognized. Therefore, it would appear prudent to screen young patients with MDS/AML for RUNX1 mutation, before consideration of sibling hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.",2 4
"De novo CDH1 mutation in a family presenting with early-onset diffuse gastric cancer. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Antigens, CD Cadherins Family Female Germ-Line Mutation Hodgkin Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Neoplasms, Multiple Primary Stomach Neoplasms || In this report, we describe the first concluded case of a de novo germline mutation in CDH1 in a hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) kindred. The incident case was a woman with a personal history of Hodgkin's lymphoma and diffuse gastric cancer, who was then confirmed to have a CDH1 mutation (c.1792 C>T (R598X)). The patient's mother was found to have the same CDH1 germline mutation; however, neither maternal grandparent was found to carry the mutation, thus leading to a conclusion that the proband's mother's mutation is of de novo origin. This case highlights the importance of recognition of the HDGC syndrome and of testing for CDH1 germline mutations in young individuals with diffuse gastric cancer without a family history of the disease.",2 4
"Alpha-Galactosidase A p.A143T, a non-Fabry disease-causing variant. || Adult Fabry Disease Female Genotype Humans Ischemic Attack, Transient Male Middle Aged Mutation Mutation, Missense Retrospective Studies Stroke alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked multisystemic disorder with a heterogeneous phenotype. Especially atypical or late-onset type 2 phenotypes present a therapeutical dilemma. To determine the clinical impact of the alpha-Galactosidase A (GLA) p.A143T/ c.427G > A variation, we retrospectively analyzed 25 p.A143T patients in comparison to 58 FD patients with other missense mutations. p.A143T patients suffering from stroke/ transient ischemic attacks had slightly decreased residual GLA activities, and/or increased lyso-Gb3 levels, suspecting FD. However, most male p.A143T patients presented with significant residual GLA activity (~50 % of reference), which was associated with normal lyso-Gb3 levels. Additionally, p.A143T patients showed less severe FD-typical symptoms and absent FD-typical renal and cardiac involvement in comparison to FD patients with other missense mutations. Two tested female p.A143T patients with stroke/TIA did not show skewed X chromosome inactivation. No accumulation of neurologic events in family members of p.A143T patients with stroke/transient ischemic attacks was observed. We conclude that GLA p.A143T seems to be most likely a neutral variant or a possible modifier instead of a disease-causing mutation. Therefore, we suggest that p.A143T patients with stroke/transient ischemic attacks of unknown etiology should be further evaluated, since the diagnosis of FD is not probable and subsequent ERT or chaperone treatment should not be an unreflected option.",2 0 3
"Mutation identification of Fabry disease in families with other lysosomal storage disorders. || Adult Aged, 80 and over Fabry Disease Female Fucosidosis Humans Middle Aged Mucopolysaccharidosis I Mutation Pedigree alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) caused by the deficiency of the enzyme α-galactosidase. It exhibits a wide clinical spectrum that may lead to a delayed or even missed diagnosis and the real incidence can be underestimated. We report the cases of two unrelated Italian families in whom FD was incidentally diagnosed in two females. In both families, the risk for other lysosomal disorders was known from other members affected by fucosidosis or mucopolysaccharidosis I Hurler/Scheie. Some subjects were simultaneously heterozygous for Fabry and the other lysosomal deficiency. Our study shows that the risk for more than one LSDs can occur in a family pedigree. The diagnosis of Fabry in female probands represents a diagnostic challenge, as symptoms and signs can be variably present because of the random X-chromosome inactivation.",2 4
"High cumulative risks of cancer in patients with PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome. || Adult Aged Breast Neoplasms Endometrial Neoplasms Female Genetic Association Studies Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Melanoma Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Risk Factors Thyroid Neoplasms || PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome (PHTS) encompasses several clinical syndromes with germline mutations in the PTEN tumour suppressor gene, including Cowden syndrome which is characterised by an increased risk of breast and thyroid cancers. Because PHTS is rare, data regarding cancer risks and genotype-phenotype correlations are limited. The objective of this study was to better define cancer risks in this syndrome with respect to the type and location of PTEN mutations. 154 PHTS individuals with a deleterious germline PTEN mutation were recruited from the activity of the Institut Bergonié genetic laboratory. Detailed phenotypic information was obtained for 146 of them. Age and sex adjusted standardised incidence ratio (SIR) calculations, cumulative cancer risk estimations, and genotype-phenotype analyses were performed. Elevated SIRs were found mainly for female breast cancer (39.1, 95% CI 24.8 to 58.6), thyroid cancer in women (43.2, 95% CI 19.7 to 82.1) and in men (199.5, 95% CI 106.39 to 342.03), melanoma in women (28.3, 95% CI 7.6 to 35.4) and in men (39.4, 95% CI 10.6 to 100.9), and endometrial cancer (48.7, 95% CI 9.8 to 142.3). Cumulative cancer risks at age 70 were 85% (95% CI 70% to 95%) for any cancer, 77% (95% CI 59% to 91%) for female breast cancer, and 38% (95% CI 25% to 56%) for thyroid cancer. The risk of cancer was two times greater in women with PHTS than in men with PHTS (p<0.05). This study shows a considerably high cumulative risk of cancer for patients with PHTS, mainly in women without clear genotype-phenotype correlation for this cancer risk. New recommendations for the management of PHTS patients are proposed.",2 4 3
"Characterization of a recurrent germ line mutation of the E-cadherin gene: implications for genetic testing and clinical management. || Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Blotting, Western Cadherins Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Codon, Nonsense Collagen DNA Mutational Analysis DNA Primers Drug Combinations Exons Germ-Line Mutation Haplotypes Heterozygote Humans Laminin Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Neoplasm Invasiveness Pedigree Plasmids Polymerase Chain Reaction Proteoglycans Risk Sequence Analysis, DNA Stomach Neoplasms || To identify germ line CDH1 mutations in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) families and develop guidelines for management of at risk individuals. We ascertained 31 HDGC previously unreported families, including 10 isolated early-onset diffuse gastric cancer (DGC) cases. Screening for CDH1 germ line mutations was done by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and automated DNA sequencing. We identified eight inactivating and one missense CDH1 germ line mutation. The missense mutation conferred in vitro loss of protein function. Two families had the previously described 1003C>T nonsense mutation. Haplotype analysis revealed this to be a recurrent and not a founder mutation. Thirty-six percent (5 of 14) of the families with a documented DGC diagnosed before the age of 50 and other cases of gastric cancer carried CDH1 germ line mutations. Two of 10 isolated cases of DGC in individuals ages <35 years harbored CDH1 germ line mutations. One mutation positive family was ascertained through a family history of lobular breast cancer (LBC) and another through an individual with both DGC and LBC. Occult DGC was identified in five of six prophylactic gastrectomies done on asymptomatic, endoscopically negative 1003C>T mutation carriers. In addition to families with a strong history of early-onset DGC, CDH1 mutation screening should be offered to isolated cases of DGC in individuals ages <35 years and for families with multiple cases of LBC, with any history of DGC or unspecified GI malignancies. Prophylactic gastrectomy is potentially a lifesaving procedure and clinical breast screening is recommended for asymptomatic mutation carriers.",2 4
"E-cadherin gene variants in gastric cancer families whose probands are diagnosed with diffuse gastric cancer. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Base Sequence Cadherins Female Fluorescent Antibody Technique Genetic Variation Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Pedigree Stomach Neoplasms Transfection || To identify germline E-cadherin mutations responsible for the predisposition to diffuse gastric cancer (DGC) among the Japanese, we screened 17 patients with familial aggregation of gastric cancer by sequencing analysis. All the patients were diagnosed with DGC and had at least 1 sibling with gastric cancer. Two novel E-cadherin gene variants were detected. One was detected in 1 patient only and associated with an amino acid substitution (Val/Met) at codon 832 in the region essential for binding to beta-catenin. The M832 variant was detected not only in the proband but also in 2 other gastric cancer patients in the family. Immunohistochemical analysis of gastric cancer tissue from the proband revealed that E-cadherin expression was markedly reduced and beta-catenin expression was also reduced in cancer cells. However, no significant difference in the activity of beta-catenin binding was detected between the M832 variant and V832 wild-type E-cadherin in immunofluorescence and immunoprecipitation/Western blot analyses. The other was detected in 5 patients and was located in the splice donor site (IVS1+6T/C); however, RT-PCR analysis indicated that the IVS+6C variant did not cause an aberrant splicing. Thus, the M832 variant could be a germline mutation causative of familial aggregation of DGC, although further functional studies are needed to understand the pathogenic significance of this variant.",2 3
"Right Ventricular Hypertrophy, Systolic Function, and Disease Severity in Anderson-Fabry Disease: An Echocardiographic Study. || Echocardiography Fabry Disease Female Humans Hypertrophy, Right Ventricular Image Interpretation, Computer-Assisted Male Middle Aged Reproducibility of Results Sensitivity and Specificity Stroke Volume Ventricular Dysfunction, Right || Right ventricular (RV) involvement has been described in Anderson-Fabry disease (AFD), especially in patients with established Fabry cardiomyopathy (FC). However, few and controversial data on RV systolic function are available, and there are no specific tissue Doppler studies. Detailed echocardiographic examinations were performed in 45 patients with AFD. FC, defined as maximal left ventricular wall thickness ≥ 15 mm, was present in 12. The Mainz Severity Score Index was calculated for each patient. Pulsed tissue Doppler was applied to the RV free wall at the tricuspid annular level and at the septal and lateral corners at the mitral annular level to obtain systolic tissue Doppler velocities (RV Sa, septal Sa, and lateral Sa, respectively). Twelve patients with amyloid light-chain cardiac amyloidosis were studied as a control group. Echocardiography revealed RV hypertrophy (RVH) in 31% of patients with AFD, all but one of whom were male and all of whom had concomitant left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). All patients with AFD had normal RV fractional area change (47.9 ± 6.5%) and tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (21.7 ± 3.2 mm) and all but one also had normal RV Sa (13.2 ± 2.2 cm/sec). RVH positively correlated with indices of LVH (r = 0.8, P = .0001, for all parameters evaluated), as well as with Mainz Severity Score Index (r = 0.70, P = .0001). Septal and lateral Sa were decreased in almost all patients (means, 7.7 ± 1.8 and 7.9 ± 1.9 cm/sec, respectively), irrespective of the presence of LVH. Compared with control subjects with cardiac amyloidosis, patients with FC showed better indices of RV systolic function (P < .001 for all: tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion, RV fractional area change, and RV Sa) despite similar RV wall thickness (6.2 ± 1.2 vs 6.9 ± 1.9 mm, P = NS). RVH is common in patients with AFD and correlates with disease severity and LVH. RVH, however, does not significantly affect RV systolic function. Patients with FC have better RV systolic function compared with those with cardiac amyloidosis with similar levels of RV thickness. The combination of low LV Sa values and normal RV Sa values might be helpful in the differential diagnosis of infiltrative heart disease.",2 4
"Activating mutations in the ABCC8 gene in neonatal diabetes mellitus. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Birth Weight Developmental Disabilities Diabetes Complications Diabetes Mellitus Female Heterozygote Humans Hypoglycemic Agents Infant, Newborn Insulin-Secreting Cells Male Mutation, Missense Pedigree Potassium Channels Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Receptors, Drug Sulfonylurea Compounds Sulfonylurea Receptors Tolbutamide || The ATP-sensitive potassium (K(ATP)) channel, composed of the beta-cell proteins sulfonylurea receptor (SUR1) and inward-rectifying potassium channel subunit Kir6.2, is a key regulator of insulin release. It is inhibited by the binding of adenine nucleotides to subunit Kir6.2, which closes the channel, and activated by nucleotide binding or hydrolysis on SUR1, which opens the channel. The balance of these opposing actions determines the low open-channel probability, P(O), which controls the excitability of pancreatic beta cells. We hypothesized that activating mutations in ABCC8, which encodes SUR1, cause neonatal diabetes. We screened the 39 exons of ABCC8 in 34 patients with permanent or transient neonatal diabetes of unknown origin. We assayed the electrophysiologic activity of mutant and wild-type K(ATP) channels. We identified seven missense mutations in nine patients. Four mutations were familial and showed vertical transmission with neonatal and adult-onset diabetes; the remaining mutations were not transmitted and not found in more than 300 patients without diabetes or with early-onset diabetes of similar genetic background. Mutant channels in intact cells and in physiologic concentrations of magnesium ATP had a markedly higher P(O) than did wild-type channels. These overactive channels remained sensitive to sulfonylurea, and treatment with sulfonylureas resulted in euglycemia. Dominant mutations in ABCC8 accounted for 12 percent of cases of neonatal diabetes in the study group. Diabetes results from a newly discovered mechanism whereby the basal magnesium-nucleotide-dependent stimulatory action of SUR1 on the Kir pore is elevated and blockade by sulfonylureas is preserved.",2 4
"Early gastric cancer in young, asymptomatic carriers of germ-line E-cadherin mutations. || Adenocarcinoma Adult Age of Onset Cadherins Carcinoma, Signet Ring Cell Female Gastrectomy Genetic Counseling Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Pedigree Primary Prevention Stomach Stomach Neoplasms || Germ-line truncating mutations in the E-cadherin (CDH1) gene have been found in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. These families are characterized by a highly penetrant susceptibility to diffuse gastric cancer with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, predominantly in young persons. We describe genetic screening, surgical management, and pathological findings in young persons with truncating mutations in CDH1 from two unrelated families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Mutation-specific predictive genetic testing was performed by polymerase-chain-reaction amplification, followed by restriction-enzyme digestion and DNA sequencing in Family 1 and by heteroduplex analysis in Family 2. A total gastrectomy was performed prophylactically in five carriers of mutations who were between 22 and 40 years old. In each case, the entire mucosa of the stomach was extensively sampled for microscopical analysis. Superficial infiltrates of malignant signet-ring cells were identified in the surgical samples from all five persons who underwent gastrectomy. These early diffuse gastric cancers were multifocal in three of the five cases, and in one person infiltrates of malignant signet-ring cells were present in 65 of the 140 tissue blocks analyzed, representing in aggregate less than 2 percent of the gastric mucosa. We recommend genetic counseling and consideration of prophylactic gastrectomy in young, asymptomatic carriers of germ-line truncating CDH1 mutations who belong to families with highly penetrant hereditary diffuse gastric cancer.",2 4
"A novel inherited mutation of the transcription factor RUNX1 causes thrombocytopenia and may predispose to acute myeloid leukaemia. || Acute Disease Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA-Binding Proteins Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Hematopoiesis Humans Leukemia, Myeloid Male Pedigree Platelet Function Tests Point Mutation Proto-Oncogene Proteins Thrombocytopenia Transcription Factors || The RUNX1 (AML1, CBFA2) gene is a member of the runt transcription factor family, responsible for DNA binding and heterodimerization of other non-DNA binding transcription factors. RUNX1 plays an important part in regulating haematopoiesis and it is frequently disrupted by illegitimate somatic recombination in both acute myeloid and lymphoblastic leukaemia. Germline mutations of RUNX1 have also recently been described and are dominantly associated with inherited leukaemic conditions. We have identified a unique point mutation of the RUNX1 gene (A107P) in members of a family with autosomal dominant inheritance of thrombocytopenia. One member has developed acute myeloid leukaemia (AML).",2 4
"Different clinical manifestations of hyperphenylalaninemia in three siblings with identical phenylalanine hydroxylase genes. || Adult Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Haplotypes Humans Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase || ",2
"Misdiagnosis of familial Mediterranean fever in patients with Anderson-Fabry disease. || Adolescent Adult Base Sequence Child Child, Preschool Cytoskeletal Proteins DNA Mutational Analysis Diagnosis, Differential Diagnostic Errors Fabry Disease Familial Mediterranean Fever Family Health Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Pyrin Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is an underdiagnosed pathology due to its symptomatology that overlaps with various systemic and rheumatic disorders, including familial Mediterranean fever (FMF). We examined the Mediterranean fever (MEFV) and α-galactosidase A (GLA) genes, whose mutations are responsible for FMF and FD, respectively, in 42 unrelated patients diagnosed with FMF, which revealed significant ambiguity regarding some of the symptoms which are also present in FD. The objective of this study was to determine the spectrum of mutations present in these genes, in order to identify cases of mistaken diagnosis of FMF and/or missed diagnosis of FD. Ten out of 42 patients had one mutation in homozygosis or two different mutations in heterozygosis in the MEFV gene; 20/42 had a single heterozygous mutation, and 12/42 did not have genetic alterations in MEFV. The analysis of the GLA gene conducted on all the samples revealed that three subjects, and some members of their families, had two different exonic mutations associated with FD. Family studies allowed us to identify eight other cases of FD, bringing the total undiagnosed subjects to 11/53. Analyzing the MEFV and GLA genes in patients with clinical diagnoses of FMF proved to be fundamentally important for the reduction of diagnostic errors.",2
"First description of germline mosaicism in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Female Genes, Dominant Haplotypes Humans Male Microsatellite Repeats Mosaicism Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous disease caused by mutations in seven sarcomeric protein genes. It is known to be transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait with rare de novo mutations.A French family in which two members are affected by hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was clinically screened with electrocardiography and echocardiography. Genetic analyses were performed on leucocyte DNA by haplotype analysis with microsatellite markers at the MYH7 locus and mutation screening by single strand conformation polymorphism analysis. Two subjects exhibited severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A mutation in the MYH7 gene was found in exon 14 (Arg453Cys). The two affected patients were carriers of the mutation, which was not found in the circulating lymphocytes of their parents. Haplotype analysis at the MYH7 locus with two intragenic microsatellite markers (MYOI and MYOII) and the absence of the mutation in the father's sperm DNA suggested that the mutation had been inherited from the mother. However, it was not found in either her fibroblasts or hair. This is the first description of germline mosaicism shown by molecular genetic analysis in an autosomal dominant disorder and more especially in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This mosaicism had been inherited from the mother but did not affect her somatic cells. Such a phenomenon might account for some de novo mutations in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.",2 4
"Genetic testing for dilated cardiomyopathy in clinical practice. || Adolescent Adult Cardiomyopathy, Dilated Carrier Proteins Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genetic Variation Humans Infant Male Medical History Taking Middle Aged Sarcomeres Young Adult || Familial involvement is common in dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) and >40 genes have been implicated in causing disease. However, the role of genetic testing in clinical practice is not well defined. We examined the experience of clinical genetic testing in a diverse DCM population to characterize the prevalence and predictors of gene mutations. We studied 264 unrelated adult and pediatric DCM index patients referred to 1 reference lab for clinical genetic testing. Up to 10 genes were analyzed (MYH7, TNNT2, TNNI3, TPM1, MYBPC3, ACTC, LMNA, PLN, TAZ, and LDB3), and 70% of patients were tested for all genes. The mean age was 26.6 ± 21.3 years, and 52% had a family history of DCM. Rigorous criteria were used to classify DNA variants as clinically relevant (mutations), variants of unknown clinical significance (VUS), or presumed benign. Mutations were found in 17.4% of patients, commonly involving MYH7, LMNA, or TNNT2 (78%). An additional 10.6% of patients had VUS. Genetic testing was rarely positive in older patients without a family history of DCM. Conversely in pediatric patients, family history did not increase the sensitivity of genetic testing. Using rigorous criteria for classifying DNA variants, mutations were identified in 17% of a diverse group of DCM index patients referred for clinical genetic testing. The low sensitivity of genetic testing in DCM reflects limitations in both current methodology and knowledge of DCM-associated genes. However, if mutations are identified, genetic testing can help guide family management.",2 4
"Familial Hypercholesterolemia in Greek children and their families: genotype-to-phenotype correlations and a reconsideration of LDLR mutation spectrum. || Adolescent Alleles Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Female Genetic Association Studies Genotype Geography Greece Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Lipids Male Mutation Phenotype Receptors, LDL || Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a common lipid metabolism disease, resulting in premature atherosclerosis, even from childhood. We aimed to define the genetic basis of FH in children and their families, to refine the spectrum of Low-Density Lipoprotein Receptor gene (LDLR) mutations and identify genotype-to-phenotype correlations in patients of Greek origin. LDLR was analyzed in 561 patients from 262 families, by whole-gene sequencing. Children with identified LDLR mutations showed higher lipid levels compared to non-carriers. Molecular analysis identified a mutation in 53.4% of index cases. Twenty six LDLR mutations were identified, including 19 point mutations, 2 nonsense mutations, 3 splice site mutations and 2 small insertions. Amongst patients with common mutations, carriers of c.1646G > A and c.1285G > A showed higher lipid levels, whereas carriers of c.858C > A and c.81C > G showed a milder phenotype. The spectrum of LDLR mutations in Greece is refined and expanded, with more patients analyzed by whole-gene sequencing. Although a quick screening method is feasible for the Greek population, whole-gene sequencing is essential to identify rare variants. Children with border line lipid levels and a family history of hypercholesterolemia should be considered for molecular diagnosis, since carriers of certain mutations show milder phenotypes and may be missed during clinical diagnosis.",2 4
"p53 compound heterozygosity in a severely affected child with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. || Adult Cell Division Child Child, Preschool Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p21 Cyclins DNA, Ribosomal Female Gene Expression Regulation Genes, p53 Genetic Carrier Screening Genetic Variation Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Multigene Family Pedigree Saccharomyces cerevisiae Transcription, Genetic Transfection Tumor Cells, Cultured || The Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a rare, dominantly inherited syndrome that features high risk of cancers in childhood and early adulthood. Affected families tend to develop bone and soft tissue sarcomas, breast cancers, brain tumors, leukemias, and adrenocortical carcinomas. In some kindreds, the genetic abnormality associated with this cancer phenotype is a heterozygous germline mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor gene. Recently, we identified one patient who presented in early childhood with multiple primary cancers and who harbored three germline p53 alterations (R156H and R267Q on the maternal allele and R290H on the paternal allele). To classify the biologic effects of these alterations, functional properties of each of the p53 mutants were examined using in vitro assays of cellular growth suppression and transcriptional activation. Each amino acid substitution conferred partial or complete loss of wild-type p53 function, but the child completed normal embryonic development. This observation has not been previously reported in a human, but is consistent with observations of normal embryogenesis in p53-deficient mice.",2 4 0 3
"Prevalence of pathogenetic MC4R mutations in Italian children with early onset obesity, tall stature and familial history of obesity. || Adolescent Age of Onset Amino Acid Substitution Body Height Child Cohort Studies Female Humans Italy Male Mutation Obesity Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Prevalence Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 || Melanocortin-4-receptor (MC4R) mutations represent the most frequent genetic cause of non-syndromic early onset obesity. Children carrying MC4R mutations seem to show a particular phenotype characterized by early onset, severe obesity and high stature. To verify whether MC4R mutations are associated with this particular phenotype in the Italian pediatric population, we decided to screen the MC4R gene in a group of obese children selected on the basis of their phenotype. To perform this study, a multicentric approach was designed. Particularly, to be enrolled in the study subjects needed to meet the following criteria: Body mass index > or = 3 deviation scores according to age and sex, familiar history of obesity (at least one parent obese), obesity onset before the 10 years old, height > or = 2 deviation scores. The coding region of MC4R gene was screened in 240 obese children (mean age 8.3 +/- 3.1, mean BMI 30.8 +/- 5.4) and in 200 controls (mean age 8.1 +/- 2.8; mean BMI 14.2 +/- 2.5). Three mutations have been found in five obese children. The S127L (C380T), found in three unrelated children, had been described and functionally characterized previously. The Q307X (C919T) and the Y332H (T994C) mutations were found in two patients. Functional studies showed that only Q307X impaired protein function. The low prevalence of MC4R mutations (1.6%) in this group of obese children selected according to the obesity degree, the tall stature and the family history of obesity was similar to the prevalence observed in previous screenings performed in obese adults and in not phenotypically selected obese children.",2 4
"Prevalence and spectrum of germline mutations of the p53 gene among patients with sarcoma. || Adolescent Adult Age Factors Base Sequence Child Codon Cross-Sectional Studies Female Genes, p53 Heterozygote Humans Infant Japan Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary Osteosarcoma Polymorphism, Genetic Sarcoma United States || Recent studies have identified germline mutations of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene in families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a rare inherited disorder characterized by a high risk of sarcomas of bone and soft tissue, breast cancer, and other tumors. In this report, we address the possibility that some sporadic sarcomas may be associated with new germline mutations of the p53 gene, which would not be manifested as familial cancer unless the patient survived to reproduce. We studied DNA from peripheral leukocytes of 196 patients with sarcoma and from 200 controls. Of the 196 patients with sarcoma, 15 were selected because they had had multiple primary cancers or had a family history of cancer. The entire coding sequence and splice junctions of the p53 gene were analyzed for mutations. Eight germline mutations were found, three in patients with no known family history of cancer and five in patients with an unusual personal or family history of cancer. Four mutations caused amino acid substitutions, and four caused stop codons. These mutations were not present in any of the 200 controls. New germline mutations of the p53 gene are rare among patients with ""sporadic"" sarcoma but may be common in patients with sarcoma whose background includes either multiple primary cancers or a family history of cancer. Diverse mutations of this gene were associated with an increased likelihood of cancer; hence, the entire gene should be considered a target for heritable mutation. It appears that the group of patients with cancer who carry germline mutations of the p53 gene is more diverse than is suggested by the clinical definition of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. The identification of carriers could be of substantial clinical importance.",2
"Pendred's syndrome and non-syndromic DFNB4 deafness associated with the homozygous T410M mutation in the SLC26A4 gene in siblings. || Biological Transport Child Chromosomes, Human, Pair 7 DNA Mutational Analysis Deafness Female Genotype Goiter Humans Male Membrane Transport Proteins Middle Aged Pedigree Phenotype Sulfate Transporters Sulfates Syndrome || ",2 1 3
"Familial hypercholesterolemia mutations in Petrozavodsk: no similarity to St. Petersburg mutation spectrum. || Alleles Europe Exons Genetic Variation Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Receptors, LDL Russia Sequence Analysis, DNA || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a human monogenic disease induced by a variety of mutations with striking genetic diversity. Despite this variability recurrent mutations occur in each population studied, which allows both elucidating prevalent mutations and developing DNA diagnostic tools for the disease. Recent research of FH in St. Petersburg, Moscow and Novosibirsk (major cities in Russia) demonstrates that each megapolis has its own FH mutation spectrum sharing only small part of mutations with other populations in Russia and Europe. In order to optimize molecular-genetic diagnostic protocols for FH in Russia we studied mutation spectrum in other regions including Petrozavodsk, a smaller town in relatively close proximity to St. Petersburg. The principal method was automated detection of single-strand conformation polymorphism followed by direct PCR amplified DNA sequencing. Twelve different mutations of the low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene were detected in the Petrozavodsk sample (80 patients). Out of these twelve mutations, seven have never been described before (c.192_201delinsGGACTTCA, c. 195_196insT, c. 618 T > G, c. 1340C > G, c. 1686_1693delinsT, c. 1936C > A, c. 2191delG). Other five mutations (c. 58G > A, c. 925_931del, c. 1194C > T, c. 1532 T > C, c. 1920C > T) were previously characterized elsewhere. All new mutations are considered to be a probable cause of the FH in their carriers. Direct evidence of the neutral character of c.58G > A or p. (Gly20Arg) is provided for the first time. Each pathogenic mutation was a trait of its own unique pedigree and so far has not been found in other patients. Strikingly, out of twelve mutations characterized in the Petrozavodsk sample only one mutation, c. 925_931del, has previously been found in patients from St. Petersburg and Finland (most closely located studied populations), suggesting some common roots in origin of these populations in the past or limited gene exchange between them nowadays. No recurrent mutations were detected.",2
"Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome among children diagnosed with pediatric cancer in Southern Brazil. || Adolescent Adrenal Cortex Neoplasms Adrenocortical Carcinoma Brazil Carcinoma Child Child, Preschool Choroid Plexus Neoplasms Female Gene Rearrangement Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Middle Aged Neoplasms Prevalence Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Pediatric cancers are a feature in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome and its variant Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFS/LFL). To the best of the authors' knowledge, TP53 germline mutations are currently the only molecular defect known to be associated with this disease. Recently, a specific germline mutation in this gene, p.R337H, has been reported at a high prevalence in Brazil. The prevalence of LFS/LFL was investigated in children with cancer who were diagnosed with tumors on the LFS/LFL spectrum and in a small consecutive series of controls without cancer. The prevalence of the germline p.R337H mutation and of other germline TP53 mutations was investigated in a general group of children with cancer and exclusively in children fulfilling the clinical criteria for LFS/LFL, respectively. Among the 65 children without cancer, 1.5% had a family history of LFL whereas of the 292 children with cancer, 25.3% had a family history of LFL (P < .001). Screening for the p.R337H mutation identified 11 carriers (3.7%), 9 of whom were diagnosed with adrenocortical carcinomas (ACC) and 2 of whom were diagnosed with choroid plexus carcinomas. One of the ACC probands was homozygous mutant. The Brazilian founder haplotype and loss of heterozygosity at the p.R337H locus were present in all carriers. In addition, direct sequencing of the entire TP53 coding region and gene rearrangement analysis of probands fulfilling the criteria for LFL (Eeles 2 criteria, Birch and/or Chompret criteria) and who were negative for the p.R337H mutation revealed a DNA-binding domain pathogenic mutation, p.G245S, in 1 child. TP53 p.R337H testing should be offered to Brazilian children diagnosed with ACC and choroid plexus carcinoma. A significant percentage of children with cancer in southern Brazil fulfill the criteria for LFL and should be referred for genetic risk assessment.",2 4 3
"The identification of two low-density lipoprotein receptor gene mutations in South African familial hypercholesterolaemia. ||  || Two point mutations were discovered in the low-density lipoprotein genes of patients with familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH). Defective genes were cloned and/or amplified by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method and the DNA sequences determined. A guanine to adenine base transition in exon 4 was found to be the molecular defect in 20% of cases of FH in the Afrikaner population. A second mutation, a guanine to adenine base substitution in exon 9, was identified in two homozygous FH individuals. Restriction enzyme analysis of PCR-amplified DNA from blood and tissue samples now permits accurate diagnosis of these mutations.",2 4
"Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy owing to double heterozygosity for a 403Arg--> Trp mutation in exon 13 of the MYH7 gene and a novel mutation, 453Arg--> His, in exon 14 of the MYH7 gene: A case report. ||  || An unusual clinical history of a 23-year-old male proband with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated with a rare genotype is presented. Genetic analysis of the proband found evidence for two distinct mutations of the MYH7 gene (the gene coding for the beta-myosin heavy chain): 403Arg--> Trp in exon 13 and a novel mutation, 453Arg--> His, in exon 14. A heterozygous site mutation was identified in exon 13 in the proband's father but no mutation site was found in his mother. Thus, the novel mutation in exon 14 is a de novo mutation.",2 4
"PTPN11 mutations in Noonan syndrome type I: detection of recurrent mutations in exons 3 and 13. ||  || We surveyed 16 subjects with the clinical diagnosis of Noonan Syndrome (NS1) from 12 families and their relevant family members for mutations in PTPN11/SHP2 using direct DNA sequencing. We found three different mutations among five families. Two unrelated subjects shared the same de novo missense substitution in exon 13 (S502T); an additional two unrelated families had a mutation in exon 3 (Y63C); and one subject had the amino acid substitution Y62D, also in exon 3. None of the three mutations were present in ethnically matched controls. In the mature protein model, the exon 3 mutants and the exon 13 mutant amino acids cluster at the interface between the N' SH2 domain and the phosphatase catalytic domain. Six of eight subjects with PTPN11/SHP2 mutations had pulmonary valve stenosis while no mutations were identified in those subjects (N = 4) with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. An additional four subjects with possible Noonan syndrome were evaluated, but no mutations in PTPN11/SHP2 were identified. These results confirm that mutations in PTPN11/SHP2 underlie a common form of Noonan syndrome, and that the disease exhibits both allelic and locus heterogeneity. The observation of recurrent mutations supports the hypothesis that a special class of gain-of-function mutations in SHP2 give rise to Noonan syndrome.",2 4
"High incidence of later-onset fabry disease revealed by newborn screening. || Adult Age of Onset Fabry Disease Female Humans Incidence Infant, Newborn Male Mutation, Missense Neonatal Screening Pedigree Phenotype RNA Splicing || The classic phenotype of Fabry disease, X-linked alpha -galactosidase A (alpha -Gal A) deficiency, has an estimated incidence of approximately 1 in 50,000 males. The recent recognition of later-onset variants suggested that this treatable lysosomal disease is more frequent. To determine the disease incidence, we undertook newborn screening by assaying the alpha-Gal A activity in blood spots from 37,104 consecutive Italian male neonates. Enzyme-deficient infants were retested, and ""doubly screened-positive"" infants and their relatives were diagnostically confirmed by enzyme and mutation analyses. Twelve (0.03%) neonates had deficient alpha-Gal A activities and specific mutations, including four novel missense mutations (M51I, E66G, A73V, and R118C), three missense mutations (F113L, A143T, and N215S) identified previously in later-onset patients, and one splicing defect (IVS5(+1G-->T)) reported in a patient with the classic phenotype. Molecular modeling and in vitro overexpression of the missense mutations demonstrated structures and residual activities, which were rescued/enhanced by an alpha-Gal A-specific pharmacologic chaperone, consistent with mutations that cause the later-onset phenotype. Family studies revealed undiagnosed Fabry disease in affected individuals. In this population, the incidence of alpha-Gal A deficiency was 1 in approximately 3,100, with an 11 : 1 ratio of patients with the later-onset : classic phenotypes. If only known disease-causing mutations were included, the incidence would be 1 in approximately 4,600, with a 7 : 1 ratio of patients with the later-onset : classic phenotypes. These results suggest that the later-onset phenotype of Fabry disease is underdiagnosed among males with cardiac, cerebrovascular, and/or renal disease. Recognition of these patients would permit family screening and earlier therapeutic intervention. However, the higher incidence of the later-onset phenotype in patients raises ethical issues related to when screening should be performed--in the neonatal period or at early maturity, perhaps in conjunction with screening for other treatable adult-onset disorders.",2 0 3
"Characterization of cryptic splicing in germline PTEN intronic variants in Cowden syndrome. || Adolescent Adult Aged Alternative Splicing Child Child, Preschool Female Gene Expression Regulation Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans MAP Kinase Signaling System Male Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pathology, Molecular Protein Isoforms Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt RNA Splice Sites Young Adult || Germline mutations in the tumor-suppressor gene PTEN predispose to subsets of Cowden syndrome (CS), Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, and autism. Evidence-based classification of PTEN variants as either deleterious or benign is urgently needed for accurate molecular diagnosis and gene-informed genetic counseling. We studied 34 different germline PTEN intronic variants from 61 CS patients, characterized their PTEN mRNA processing, and analyzed PTEN expression and downstream readouts of P-AKT and P-ERK1/2. While we found that many mutations near splice junctions result in exon skipping, we also identified the presence of cryptic splicing that resulted in premature termination or a shift in isoform usage. PTEN protein expression is significantly lower in the group with splicing changes while P-AKT, but not P-ERK1/2, is significantly increased. Our observations of these PTEN intronic variants should contribute to the determination of pathogenicity of PTEN intronic variants and aid in genetic counseling.",2 4 0 3
"Mutations of PTEN in patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba phenotype. || Adolescent Adult Child Exons Female Genes, Tumor Suppressor Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phenotype Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Pigmentation Disorders Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Proteins || We report three new mutations in PTEN, the gene responsible for Cowden disease in five patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome from three unrelated families. This finding confirms that Cowden disease, a dominant cancer predisposing syndrome, and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, which includes macrocephaly, multiple lipomas, intestinal hamartomatous polyps, vascular malformations, and pigmented macules of the penis, are allelic disorders at the PTEN locus on chromosome 10q.",2 4 3
"Astrocytomas and choroid plexus tumors in two families with identical p53 germline mutations. || Adult Antigens, Polyomavirus Transforming Astrocytoma Brain Neoplasms Carcinoma Child Child, Preschool Choroid Plexus Neoplasms Female Germ-Line Mutation Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein Glioblastoma Humans Infant Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Middle Aged Papilloma Pedigree Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Germline p53 mutations carry an increased risk of development of breast cancer, soft tissue and osteosarcomas, brain tumors, leukemia and adrenocortical carcinomas. Cerebral neoplasms are usually of astrocytic lineage and occur in 40% of affected families. This report presents clinical, neuropathological and molecular genetic data from 2 families in France with an identical p53 germline mutation in codon 248 (CGG->TGG; Arg->Trp) and a clustering of CNS tumors. The youngest patient in each family developed a malignant choroid plexus tumor while several young adults of both kindred succumbed to low-grade astrocytoma, anaplastic astrocytoma or glioblastoma. The only non-neural neoplasm was an adrenocortical carcinoma in a boy aged 4 years who developed an anaplastic choroid plexus papilloma 2 years later. Of 2 previously reported inherited choroid plexus tumors, 1 occurred in a family which also carried a germline mutation in codon 248. It remains to be shown whether this unusual pattern of CNS tumors is due to an organ-specific effect of this particular p53 mutation or whether it reflects the genetic background of the affected families.",2
"Patients with Obesity Caused by Melanocortin-4 Receptor Mutations Can Be Treated with a Glucagon-like Peptide-1 Receptor Agonist. ||  || Pathogenic mutations in the appetite-regulating melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) represent the most common cause of monogenic obesity with limited treatment options. Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) cause weight loss by reducing appetite. We assessed the effect of the GLP-1 RA liraglutide 3.0 mg for 16 weeks in 14 obese individuals with pathogenic MC4R mutations (BMI 37.5 ± 6.8) and 28 matched control participants without MC4R mutation (BMI 36.8 ± 4.8). Liraglutide decreased body weight by 6.8 kg ± 1.8 kg in individuals with pathogenic MC4R mutations and by 6.1 kg ± 1.2 kg in control participants. Total body fat, waist circumference, and fasting and postprandial glucose concentrations similarly decreased in both groups. Thus, liraglutide induced an equal, clinically significant weight loss of 6% in both groups, indicating that the appetite-reducing effect of liraglutide is preserved in MC4R causal obesity and that liraglutide acts independently of the MC4R pathway. Thus, liraglutide could be an effective treatment of the most common form of monogenic obesity.",2 4
"Prevalence and diversity of constitutional mutations in the p53 gene among 21 Li-Fraumeni families. || Base Sequence Child Codon Exons Family Health Female Genes, p53 Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Prevalence || The entire coding sequence of the p53 gene was analysed for the presence of mutations in 12 families conforming to a restricted definition of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (classic LFS) and nine families with features of LFS conforming to a broader definition. Mutations were detected in seven families. Six were point mutations with one each affecting codons 175, 180, and 220 and three affecting codon 248. The seventh was a deletion/insertion mutation in exon 4. Germline mutations in p53 were a feature of families which included children with rhabdomyosarcoma and/or adrenal cortical carcinoma. Germline p53 mutations were detected in six of the nine families with such tumors. An analysis of these 7 mutations, together with 34 published examples, showed that more than one-half were transitions at CpG dinucleotides, suggesting that the majority of germline p53 mutations may arise as a result of spontaneous events. The most common cancers occurring in the 41 families with germline p53 mutations, in common with classic LFS, were bone and soft tissue sarcoma, breast cancer, brain tumors, leukemia, and adrenocortical carcinoma, although less than one-half of the probands with germline p53 mutations came from classic LFS families. More than one-half of the cancers overall and nearly one-third of the breast cancers were diagnosed before 30 years of age. These observations have important implications for asymptomatic carriers of germline p53 mutations, and there is a need for international collaboration in the development of protocols for the management of such families.",2 4 3
"Beta-myosin heavy chain gene mutations and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in Austrian children. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Amino Acid Substitution Austria Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Child, Preschool Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 DNA Mutational Analysis Death, Sudden, Cardiac Electrocardiography Female Genes, Dominant Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Infant Male Mutation, Missense Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Point Mutation || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy occurs in two variants, either as an autosomal dominant familial disorder or as a sporadic disease without familial involvement. Different genes coding sarcomeric proteins of the heart have been identified as causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Missense mutations in the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene are found in 30% of all cases of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. We screened the beta-myosin heavy chain gene of children of nine Austrian families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (referred to as group A) and of seven children with sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (referred to as group B). We were able to find two previously described (V606M, R453C) and two unknown missense mutations (V406M, R663H) in group A. Additionally, in two children of group B we could identify one already known missense mutation, R249Q as well as one previously unknown missense mutation, M877K. The genetically affected children of group A developed no or only mild clinical symptoms, whereas the children of group B with genetically confirmed sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy showed manifest left ventricular hypertrophy and clinical symptoms including chest pain and dyspnoea. Clinical symptoms among the adults of group A, suffering from familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, varied significantly. We therefore believe V406M to be a more malignant missense mutation, probably linked with sudden death in the affected family, than R663H, which seems to be more benign causing late-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and mild clinical symptoms in the affected family members.",2 4
"Identification and characterization of melanocortin-4 receptor gene mutations in morbidly obese finnish children and adults. || Adolescent Adult Cell Line Child Cohort Studies Female Finland Heterozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Obesity, Morbid Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Signal Transduction Tissue Distribution || Two Finnish cohorts, comprising 56 children with severe early-onset obesity (relative weight for height greater than or equal to +70% before age 10) and 252 morbidly obese adults (body mass index, > or = 40 kg/m(2)), were screened for melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) mutations. We identified a pathogenic mutation (S127L) in one child, causing severe early-onset obesity. We describe the phenotype of this particular mutation for the first time. We also identified a novel (I226T) polymorphism in the coding and two new variations (-439delGC and 1059C>T) outside the coding region of the MC4R gene. Three previously described polymorphisms (V103I, T112M, and I125L) were identified. In vitro functional studies of variants T112M, S127L, and I226T supported a pathogenic role of the S127L mutation, because signaling properties of the receptor in response to the MC4R agonists alpha-MSH, beta-MSH, and gamma(1)-MSH were impaired. The S127L mutation did not affect receptor inhibition by the antagonist agouti-related protein. Localization of the three variant receptors was similar to that of wild type. In conclusion, a pathogenic MC4R mutation was found among subjects with severe early-onset obesity but not among morbidly obese adults. Impaired function of the S127L receptor was due to reduced activation, not a defect of protein transport to the cell membrane.",2 4 0
"Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer: a family diagnosis and treatment. || Adenocarcinoma Antigens, CD Cadherins Gastrectomy Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Stomach Neoplasms || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is a rare cancer representing approximately 2% of all gastric cancers. It is caused by CDHI gene mutations, inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, that affect the function of E-cadherin. Approximately 38% of HDGC families have a CDHI gene mutation. With an estimated 75% penetrance rate, carriers are at high risk for HDGC. We describe the case of a Caucasian male of German-Russian ancestry, carrying a CDHI gene mutation, who survived for 18 months after being diagnosed with HDGC. The results of genetic testing undergone by his family members are also reported, along with a review of the current literature. Since surveillance methods for HDGC are ineffective and unreliable, total prophylactic gastrectomy is advised for individuals with the gene mutation. Additionally, a diagnosis of HDGC should lead to genetic evaluation of family members followed by preventative measures.",2
"Defective mutations in the insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF-1) gene in late-onset type 2 diabetes mellitus. || Blood Glucose Blotting, Western Chloramphenicol O-Acetyltransferase DNA Mutational Analysis Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female France Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Homeodomain Proteins Humans Insulin Male Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Time Factors Trans-Activators || Type 2 diabetes mellitus is a common disabling disease with onset in middle-aged individuals, caused by an imbalance between insulin production and action. Genetic studies point to major genetic components, but, with the exception of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), specific diabetes susceptibility genes remain to be identified. Recent studies showed that a dominant negative mutation in the insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF-1), a pancreatic beta-cell specific transcription factor, causes pancreatic agenesis and MODY. Thus, we investigated 192 French, non-MODY type 2 diabetic families for mutations in IPF-1. We identified 3 novel IPF-1 mutations, including 2 substitutions (Q59L and D76N) and an in-frame proline insertion (InsCCG243). Functional transactivation assays of these IPF-1 mutant isoforms in a beta-pancreatic tumor cell line transfected with a transcriptional reporter and IPF-1 expression plasmids demonstrate a significant inhibition of basal insulin promoter activity (stronger with the InsCCG243 mutant). We find that the InsCCG243 mutation is linked, in 2 families, to an autosomal dominant-like late-onset form of type 2 diabetes, in which insulin secretion becomes progressively impaired. The lower penetrance D76N and Q59L mutations were more prevalent and were associated with a relative risk of 12.6 for diabetes and with decreased glucose-stimulated insulin-secretion in nondiabetic subjects. We propose that IPF-1 mutations can cause MODY or apparently monogenic late-onset diabetes and that they represent a significant risk factor for type 2 diabetes in humans.",2 0
"Clinical and metabolic features of adult-onset diabetes caused by ABCC8 mutations. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Adolescent Adult Diabetes Mellitus Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Humans Hypoglycemic Agents Insulin Male Mutation Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Receptors, Drug Sulfonylurea Compounds Sulfonylurea Receptors Young Adult || Gain-of-function ABCC8/sulfonylurea (SU) receptor 1 mutations cause neonatal diabetes mellitus (NDM) or late-onset diabetes in adult relatives. Given the effectiveness of SU treatment in ABCC8-NDM patients, we further characterized late-onset ABCC8-associated diabetes. Seven adult subjects from three NDM families and one family with type 2 diabetes were studied. Insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity were assessed using clamp techniques. We screened 139 type 2 diabetic patients who were well controlled by SU for ABCC8 mutations. ABCC8 mutation carriers exhibited glucose intolerance, frank diabetes, or insulin-requiring diabetes since diagnosis. HbA(1c) improved in five SU-treated patients. Insulin secretion capacity was impaired in three patients compared with adult control subjects but was restored after a 4-week SU trial in two patients. Cohort screening revealed four SU-treated patients with ABCC8 mutations, two of which are likely causal. Although of rare occurrence, recognition of adult-onset ABCC8-associated diabetes may help in targeting patients for SU therapy.",2 4
"Systematic analysis of variants related to familial hypercholesterolemia in families with premature myocardial infarction. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adult Aged Cholesterol, LDL Coronary Artery Disease Europe Exome Female Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Myocardial Infarction Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Risk Factors Serine Endopeptidases || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an oligogenic disorder characterized by markedly elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDLC) levels. Variants in four genes have been reported to cause the classical autosomal-dominant form of the disease. FH is largely under-diagnosed in European countries. As FH increases the risk for coronary artery disease (CAD) and myocardial infarction (MI), it might be specifically overlooked in the large number of such patients. Here, we systematically examined the frequency of potential FH-causing variants by exome sequencing in 255 German patients with premature MI and a positive family history for CAD. We further performed co-segregation analyses in an average of 5.5 family members per MI patient. In total, we identified 11 potential disease-causing variants that co-segregate within the families, that is, 5% of patients with premature MI and positive CAD family history had FH. Eight variants were previously reported as disease-causing and three are novel (LDLR.c.811G>A p.(V271I)), PCSK9.c.610G>A (p.(D204N)) and STAP1.c.139A>G (p.(T47A))). Co-segregation analyses identified multiple additional family members carrying one of these FH variants and the clinical phenotype of either FH (n=2) or FH and premature CAD (n=15). However, exome sequencing also revealed that some variants in FH genes, which have been reported to cause FH, do not co-segregate with FH. The data reveal that a large proportion of FH patients escape the diagnosis, even when they have premature MI. Hence, systematic molecular-genetic screening for FH in such patients may reveal a substantial number of cases and thereby allow a timely LDLC-lowering in both FH/MI patients as well as their variant-carrying family members.",2 4
"Younger age of cancer initiation is associated with shorter telomere length in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. || Adolescent Adult Age Factors Child Child, Preschool Female Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Lymphocytes Male Middle Aged Neoplasms Pedigree Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Telomere || Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a cancer predisposition syndrome frequently associated with germ line TP53 mutations. Unpredictable and disparate age of cancer onset is a major challenge in the management of LFS. Genetic modifiers, including the MDM2-SNP309 polymorphism, and genetic anticipation have been suggested as plausible explanations for young age of tumor onset, but the molecular mechanisms for these observations are unknown. We speculated that telomere attrition will increase genomic instability and cause earlier tumor onset in successive generations. We analyzed mean telomere length and MDM2-SNP309 polymorphism status in individuals from multiple LFS families and controls. A total of 45 peripheral blood lymphocyte samples were analyzed from 9 LFS families and 15 controls. High rate of MDM2-SNP309 was found in TP53 carriers (P = 0.0003). In children, telomere length was shorter in carriers affected with cancer than in nonaffected carriers and wild-type controls (P < 0.0001). The same pattern was seen in adults (P = 0.002). Within each family, telomere length was shorter in children with cancer than in their nonaffected siblings and their noncarrier parents. Telomere attrition between children and adults was faster in carriers than in controls. Our results support the role of MDM2-SNP309 as a genetic modifier in LFS. The novel finding of accelerated telomere attrition in LFS suggests that telomere length could explain earlier age of onset in successive generations of the same family with identical TP53/MDM2-SNP309 genotypes. Furthermore, telomere shortening could predict genetic anticipation observed in LFS and may serve as the first rational biological marker for clinical monitoring of these patients.",2 4
"Fabry or not Fabry--a question of ascertainment. || Fabry Disease Heterozygote Humans Mutation, Missense alpha-Galactosidase || ",2 4 3
"Functional assessment of allelic variants in the SLC26A4 gene involved in Pendred syndrome and nonsyndromic EVA. || Alleles Amino Acid Sequence Animals Cell Line Cohort Studies Genes, Recessive Genotype Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Membrane Transport Proteins Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Open Reading Frames Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Sequence Homology, Amino Acid Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Vestibular Aqueduct || Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by sensorineural hearing loss, with malformations of the inner ear, ranging from enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA) to Mondini malformation, and deficient iodide organification in the thyroid gland. Nonsyndromic EVA (ns-EVA) is a separate type of sensorineural hearing loss showing normal thyroid function. Both Pendred syndrome and ns-EVA seem to be linked to the malfunction of pendrin (SLC26A4), a membrane transporter able to exchange anions between the cytosol and extracellular fluid. In the past, the pathogenicity of SLC26A4 missense mutations were assumed if the mutations fulfilled two criteria: low incidence of the mutation in the control population and substitution of evolutionary conserved amino acids. Here we show that these criteria are insufficient to make meaningful predictions about the effect of these SLC26A4 variants on the pendrin-induced ion transport. Furthermore, we functionally characterized 10 missense mutations within the SLC26A4 ORF, and consistently found that on the protein level, an addition or omission of a proline or a charged amino acid in the SLC26A4 sequence is detrimental to its function. These types of changes may be adequate for predicting SLC26A4 functionality in the absence of direct functional tests.",2 1
"Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and atrial fibrillation caused by Arg663His beta-cardiac myosin heavy chain mutation. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Amino Acid Sequence Atrial Fibrillation Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Echocardiography Electrocardiography, Ambulatory Female Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Prognosis Retrospective Studies || More than 40 different beta-cardiac myosin heavy chain (beta-MHC) missense mutations have been identified that cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC). Some of these are recognized to have important clinical manifestations, such as an increased incidence of sudden death. We report that the beta-MHC missense mutation Arg663His causes predominant cardiac morphology and atrial fibrillation. Longitudinal clinical evaluations were performed in a kindred with FHC. The nucleotide sequence of the beta-MHC gene was analyzed to define the causal mutation. A missense mutation in the beta-MHC gene, Arg663His, was identified in 24 individuals. Clinical studies demonstrated modest left ventricular hypertrophy in affected individuals, predominantly localized in the proximal segment of the interventricular septum, which increased (average = 40 +/- 8%) during 7 years of follow-up. Results showed that 47% of Arg663His adults (age > 16 years) with ventricular hypertrophy developed atrial fibrillation, significantly more (p <0.001) than observed in ungenotyped FHC populations. Survival of affected individuals remained near normal. The beta-MHC missense mutation Arg663His causes a characteristic pattern of ventricular hypertrophy. Arg663His individuals have a markedly higher prevalence of atrial fibrillation, compared with a population with ungenotyped hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The demonstration of phenotype as a direct consequence of genotype further extends the utility of molecular data in clinical medicine. Early identification of Arg663His individuals has the potential to minimize the serious sequelae of this arrhythmia in this FHC group.",2 4
"Clinical and genetic studies in Spanish patients with Usher syndrome type II: description of new mutations and evidence for a lack of genotype--phenotype correlation. || Adult Child Codon, Nonsense DNA Mutational Analysis Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Frameshift Mutation Gene Frequency Genotype Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Mutation Mutation, Missense Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Retinitis Pigmentosa Spain Syndrome || Patients with Usher syndrome type II (USH2) show moderate-to-severe hearing loss (HL), retinitis pigmentosa and normal vestibular function. The progression of HL remains controversial. To evaluate whether a phenotype-genotype correlation exists regarding the issue of progression of HL, only USH2 patients with a defined genotype were selected. Ophthalmologic, vestibular and audiometric examination along with a mutation analysis of the USH2A gene (exons 1--21) was performed in twenty-eight Spanish USH2 patients. Ten different pathogenic mutations and 17 sequence variants not associated with the disease were found. Six of the 10 mutations are novel. Disease alleles were identified in 13 of the 28 families tested. Eight of these 13 families had a mutation found in both alleles. In the other five families, only one mutation was identified. The phenotypic data provide evidence for the existence of phenotypic differences between patients with the same genotype. These differences were observed at both the interfamilial and intrafamilial levels.",2 1
"Germ-line TP53 mutations in Finnish cancer families exhibiting features of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome and negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2. || BRCA2 Protein Female Finland Genes, BRCA1 Genes, p53 Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Neoplasm Proteins Neoplasms Pedigree Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Transcription Factors || Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for a large portion of the inherited predisposition to breast and ovarian cancer. It was recently discovered that mutations in these two genes are less common in the Finnish population than expected. Because the genetic background of breast cancer, in particular, is largely obscure, it became necessary to search for mutations in other susceptibility genes. Because seven of our BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation-negative families fulfilled the criteria of either Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) or Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFL), we decided to screen them for germ-line TP53 mutations in exons 5-8 using a dual-temperature single-strand conformation polymorphism assay (SSCP). Two missense mutations (Asn235Ser and Tyr220Cys) were identified. The clinical significance of these findings was evaluated by comparison to previously reported germ-line TP53 mutation data, and by using the tumor loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis. In addition, an immunohistochemical analysis of tumor specimens from mutation-positive individuals was performed. Our results suggest that the observed missense mutations confer susceptibility to cancer, and that germ-line TP53 mutations would therefore explain an additional fraction of hereditary breast cancer in Finland.",2 3
"Maturity-onset diabetes of the young with end-stage nephropathy: a new indication for simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplantation? ||  || BACKGROUND AND CASE: Simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplantation (SPK) is applied almost exclusively in C-peptide-negative type 1 diabetic patients, although some data on SPK in type 2 diabetes have been published as well. Nothing is known about SPK in the autosomal diabetes form, maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). SPK was performed in a 47-year old man who has MODY3 because of a Arg272His mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alphagene. He developed overt diabetes mellitus at 19 years and end-stage diabetic nephropathy 26 years thereafter. Before SPK, the patient had measurable fasting serum C-peptide levels, but lacked beta-cell response to intravenous glucose and glucagon. He was treated with 34 IU of insulin per day. At 2 years post-transplantation, the patient remains normoglycemic and insulin independent. A hyperglycemic clamp test showed a normal beta-cell function. Identification of MODY3 among all C-peptide-positive patients with advanced diabetic nephropathy might help to select a specific group profiting from SPK.",2
"Hereditary leukemia due to rare RUNX1c splice variant (L472X) presents with eczematous phenotype. ||  || Deleterious mutations in the RUNX1 gene cause hereditary leukemia due to a rare syndrome called Familial platelet Disorder with Associated Myeloid Malignancy (FPDMM). We describe the characteristics of a family with FPDMM due to a novel RUNX1 mutation (L472X), located in the most 3-prime end of the gene reported to date. Our 36-year old proband presented with incidentally detected thrombocytopenia and a family history suggestive of FPDMM. Contrary to previously described families, affected members of our kindred express an eczematous phenotype, reportedly most severe in members who develop leukemia. Pedigree analysis shows that the L472X mutation tracks with thrombocytopenia, acute leukemia, and eczema. The L472X mutation produces a stably expressed RUNX1 protein product with a corresponding decrease in wild type RUNX1 expression. Our data supports the inclusion of eczema in the FPDMM phenotype and suggests the possibility that the RUNX1 L472X mutant causes the type of dominant negative affect that is associated with an elevated risk of leukemia in FPDMM families.",2 4 0
"Sodium channel abnormalities are infrequent in patients with long QT syndrome: identification of two novel SCN5A mutations. ||  || Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a heterogeneous disorder caused by mutations of at least five different loci. Three of these, LQT1, LQT2, and LQT5, encode potassium channel subunits. LQT3 encodes the cardiac-specific sodium channel, SCN5A. Previously reported LQTS-associated mutations of SCN5A include a recurring three amino acid deletion (DeltaKPQ1505-1507) in four different families, and four different missense mutations. We have examined the SCN5A gene in 88 index cases with LQTS, including four with Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome and the remainder with Romano-Ward syndrome. Screening portions of DIII-DIV, where mutations have previously been found, showed that none of these patients has the three amino acid deletion, DeltaKPQ1505-1507, or the other four known mutations. We identified a novel missense mutation, T1645M, in the DIV; S4 voltage sensor immediately adjacent to the previously reported mutation R1644H. We also examined all of the additional pore-forming regions and voltage-sensing regions and discovered another novel mutation, T1304M, at the voltage-sensing region DIII; S4. Neither T1645M nor T1304M were seen in a panel of unaffected control individuals. Five of six T1304M gene carriers were symptomatic. In contrast to previous studies, QT(onset-c) was not a sensitive indicator of SCN5A-associated LQTS, at least in this family. These data suggest that mutations of SCN5A are responsible for only a small proportion of LQTS cases.",2
"A Pro51Ser mutation in the COCH gene is associated with late onset autosomal dominant progressive sensorineural hearing loss with vestibular defects. || Age of Onset Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Deafness Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Genes, Dominant Genetic Linkage Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Microsatellite Repeats Pedigree Point Mutation Proline Proteins Serine Vestibular Diseases || We analysed a Dutch family with autosomal dominant non-syndromic progressive sensorineural hearing loss and mapped the underlying gene defect by genetic linkage analysis to a 11.0 cM region overlapping the DFNA9 interval on chromosome 14q12-q13. Clinically, the Dutch family differs from the original DFNA9 family by a later age at onset and a more clearly established vestibular impairment. A gene that is highly and specifically expressed in the human fetal cochlea and vestibule, COCH (previously described as Coch5B2 ), was mapped to the DFNA9 critical region. Sequence analysis revealed a 208C-->T mutation in the COCH gene, resulting in a Pro51Ser substitution in the predicted protein in all affected individuals of the family but not in unaffected family members and 200 control individuals. The same mutation was also identified in three apparently unrelated families with a similar phenotype, suggesting the presence of a Dutch founder mutation. The function of COCH is unknown but several characteristics of the protein point to a structural role in the extracellular matrix. The mutant serine at position 51 is situated between cysteines and possibly interferes with proper COCH protein folding or its interaction with extracellular matrix proteins.",2
"A novel splice-site mutation in the GJB2 gene causing mild postlingual hearing impairment. ||  || The DFNB1 subtype of autosomal recessive, nonsyndromic hearing impairment, caused by mutations affecting the GJB2 (connexin-26) [corrected] gene, is highly prevalent in most populations worldwide. DFNB1 hearing impairment is mostly severe or profound and usually appears before the acquisition of speech (prelingual onset), though a small number of hypomorphic missense mutations result in mild or moderate deafness of postlingual onset. We identified a novel GJB2 splice-site mutation, c. -22-2A>C, in three siblings with mild postlingual hearing impairment that were compound heterozygous for c. -22-2A>C and c.35delG. Reverse transcriptase-PCR experiments performed on total RNA extracted from saliva samples from one of these siblings confirmed that c. -22-2A>C abolished the acceptor splice site of the single GJB2 intron, resulting in the absence of normally processed transcripts from this allele. However, we did isolate transcripts from the c. -22-2A>C allele that keep an intact GJB2 coding region and that were generated by use of an alternative acceptor splice site previously unknown. The residual expression of wild-type connexin-26 [corrected] encoded by these transcripts probably underlies the mild severity and late onset of the hearing impairment of these subjects.",2 1 0
"Familial cases of atypical clinical features genetically diagnosed as LEOPARD syndrome (multiple lentigines syndrome). || Adult Aged Biopsy Female Humans Hyperpigmentation LEOPARD Syndrome Male Mutation, Missense Pedigree Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Skin || Five familial cases exhibited ephelides-like multiple lentigines, and we examined three of them, a mother and two sons. All three patients presented with small dark-brown maculae on the face and neck and electrocardiographic abnormalities. These findings sufficed to fulfill the criteria for LEOPARD syndrome (multiple lentigines syndrome), although they lacked five of seven major clinical features. However, the family members presented with a webbed neck and pectus excavatum, which are more frequently seen in Turner or Noonan syndrome. Histological examination of the lentigines revealed slightly elongated rete ridges, a hyperpigmented basal layer, and melanophages in the papillary dermis. Direct sequencing of the patients' genomic DNA revealed that all three had a consistent missense mutation [c.1403C > T (p.T468M)] in the PTPN11 gene, confirming LEOPARD syndrome with an atypical phenotype. It was suggested that LEOPARD syndrome shows a diverse phenotype but its diagnosis can be verified by mutation analysis.",2 4
"[Beta-myosin heavy-chain gene mutations in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy]. || Adolescent Adult Aged Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Data Interpretation, Statistical Death, Sudden, Cardiac Female Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational || To determine the frequency of mutations in the beta-myosin heavy-chain gene (MYH7) in a cohort of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and their families, and to investigate correlations between genotype and phenotype. Single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and sequencing of fragments with abnormal MYH7 gene mobility were carried out in 128 consecutive index patients with HCM. The phenotypes of patients with and without mutations were compared and the phenotypes of identified families were recorded. A total of 11 mutations were found in 13 families (10%); 7/11 had been previously described. The I736T mutation was found in three families and the A797T in two. One patient had two mutations (i.e., I736T and R787H). Mutations were more frequent in patients with a family history of sudden death (31%) and in those with severe hypertrophy (39% had a thickness > or = 30 mm). Mutations were found in 29 of 42 members of the 13 families, including six family members (20%) who were healthy carriers and aged < or = 36 years. Sudden death had occurred in eight members of four families: four in two families with the I736T mutation, one in a family with A797T, one in a family with R870H, and two in a family with A901P. MYH7 mutations were present in 10% of our families. Mutations were more frequent in patients with a family history of sudden death and in those with severe hypertrophy. Most mutations had been described previously. Some appeared in several families. For some mutations, the correlation between genotype and phenotype was stable, while for others, there were marked differences between the phenotypes of the index patients and their relatives, suggesting the presence of additional genetic factors that have yet to be identified.",2 4
"Mutation of a gene encoding a protein with extracellular matrix motifs in Usher syndrome type IIa. || Amino Acid Sequence Animals Cell Adhesion Molecules Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 1 Cochlea Epidermal Growth Factor Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Fibronectins Frameshift Mutation Gene Expression Genes, Recessive Glycosylation Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Laminin Male Molecular Sequence Data Pedigree Retina Retinitis Pigmentosa Syndrome Tumor Cells, Cultured || Usher syndrome type IIa (OMIM 276901), an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss and progressive retinitis pigmentosa, maps to the long arm of human chromosome 1q41 between markers AFM268ZD1 and AFM144XF2. Three biologically important mutations in Usher syndrome type IIa patients were identified in a gene (USH2A) isolated from this critical region. The USH2A gene encodes a protein with a predicted size of 171.5 kilodaltons that has laminin epidermal growth factor and fibronectin type III motifs; these motifs are most commonly observed in proteins comprising components of the basal lamina and extracellular matrixes and in cell adhesion molecules.",2 1 3
"Mutations in the CEL VNTR cause a syndrome of diabetes and pancreatic exocrine dysfunction. || Adult Animals CHO Cells Cricetinae Cricetulus Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Humans Insulin-Secreting Cells Lipase Male Minisatellite Repeats Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pancreas, Exocrine Pedigree RNA, Messenger || Dysfunction of the exocrine pancreas is observed in diabetes, but links between concurrent exocrine and endocrine pancreatic disease and contributing genetic factors are poorly characterized. We studied two families with diabetes and exocrine pancreatic dysfunction by genetic, physiological and in vitro functional studies. A genome-wide screen in Family 1 linked diabetes to chromosome 9q34 (maximal lod score 5.07). Using fecal elastase deficiency as a marker of exocrine pancreatic dysfunction refined the critical chromosomal region to 1.16 Mb (maximal lod score 11.6). Here, we identified a single-base deletion in the variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR)-containing exon 11 of the carboxyl ester lipase (CEL) gene, a major component of pancreatic juice and responsible for the duodenal hydrolysis of cholesterol esters. Screening subjects with maturity-onset diabetes of the young identified Family 2, with another single-base deletion in CEL and a similar phenotype with beta-cell failure and pancreatic exocrine disease. The in vitro catalytic activities of wild-type and mutant CEL protein were comparable. The mutant enzyme was, however, less stable and secreted at a lower rate. Furthermore, we found some evidence for an association between common insertions in the CEL VNTR and exocrine dysfunction in a group of 182 unrelated subjects with diabetes (odds ratio 4.2 (1.6, 11.5)). Our findings link diabetes to the disrupted function of a lipase in the pancreatic acinar cells.",2 4
"Evaluation of the molecular mechanisms involved in the gain of function of a Li-Fraumeni TP53 mutation. ||  || The TP53 tumor suppressor gene is the most frequent target for genetic alterations in human cancer. TP53 gene alterations may result in the gain of oncogenic functions such as neoangiogenesis and resistance to therapy. The TP53 germ line mutation c.659A>C (p.Y220S) was identified in stored DNA from related patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) who died after developing clinically aggressive tumors. All of the patients were treated with protocols that included doxorubicin hydrochloride (DX) as a pivotal drug. To define the in vitro mutational phenotype of this germ line mutation, we used murine fibroblasts explanted from wild-type (wt) and p53 knockout (KO) mice from the same littermate. p53Y220S and p53R175H fibroblasts, obtained from p53KO fibroblasts transfected with expression vectors encoding the human Y220S and R175H p53 mutants, respectively, exhibited resistance to DX treatment. Moreover, p53Y220S fibroblasts exhibited angiogenetic properties, and after DX treatment, p53Y220S failed to translocate into the nucleus and showed an increase in its cytosolic levels. DX treatment does not influence p53 distribution within the nuclear and cytosolic compartments in p53R175H fibroblasts. Peroxiredoxin II (Prx II), a protein that is involved in eliminating reactive oxygen species (ROS), showed increased expression intensity in p53Y220S fibroblasts after DX treatment, as observed by two-dimensional electrophoresis analysis. Moreover, Thioredoxin (Trx), a protein that cooperates with Prx II, is overexpressed in p53Y220S mutants under basal conditions. These data suggest a relationship between the presence of the p53Y220S mutation and enhanced levels of Prx II and Trx in mutant fibroblasts. Since one of the mechanisms of the DX antitumor effect has been ascribed to production of ROS, future studies will evaluate the involvement of PrxII and Trx in the chemoresistance of p53Y220S fibroblasts to DX.",2
"Mutations in the PDS gene in German families with Pendred's syndrome: V138F is a founder mutation. || Adolescent Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence Carrier Proteins Child Child, Preschool Female Founder Effect Germany Haplotypes Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Hypothyroidism Infant, Newborn Male Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation, Missense Pedigree Serine Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Threonine Turkey || Pendred's syndrome, an autosomal-recessive condition characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing loss and goiter, is caused by mutations in the PDS gene. Located on chromosome 7q22-q31, it encodes a chloride-iodide transporter expressed in the thyroid, inner ear, and kidney. We investigated the PDS gene of six affected individuals from four unrelated families with Pendred's syndrome by direct sequencing. PDS mutations were identified in homozygous or compound heterozygous state in all six cases. A homozygous missense mutation leading to the amino acid substitution S133T was detected in a family of Turkish origin. The mutations found in the other affected individuals, who originate from Germany, were V138F/Y530H, V138F/E384G, and V138F/V138F. Because V138F was found in the German patients with Pendred's syndrome on at least one allele, we genotyped five microsatellite markers located in the PDS region. All affected German individuals shared a common haplotype at three microsatellite markers located close to or within the PDS gene. We therefore concluded that V138F is a founder mutation in our cohort of German families with Pendred's syndrome.",2 1 3
"Mutations of the beta myosin heavy chain gene in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: critical functional sites determine prognosis. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Cohort Studies Conserved Sequence Female Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Polymorphism, Genetic Prognosis Risk Factors Sequence Analysis, DNA Survival Analysis || To assess patients with different types of mutations of the beta myosin heavy chain (beta MHC) gene causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and to determine the prognosis of patients according to the affected functional domain of beta MHC. Cohort study of subjects referred to an HCM clinic at an academic hospital. 70 probands from the HCM clinic were screened for mutations of the beta MHC gene and 148 family members of the genotype positive probands were further assessed. The control group for the genetic studies consisted of 106 healthy subjects. Direct DNA sequencing was used to screen 70 probands for mutations of the beta MHC gene. Family members underwent genotypic and detailed clinical, ECG, and echocardiographic assessments. The survival of genotype positive subjects was evaluated according to the type of functional domain affected by the missense mutation and according to phenotypic characteristics. A mutation of the beta MHC gene was detected in 15 of 70 probands (21%). Of 148 family members studied in these 15 families, 74 were identified with a beta MHC defect. Eleven mutations were detected, including four novel mutations: Ala196Thr, Pro211Leu, Val404Leu, and Arg870Cys. Median survival was 66 years (95% confidence interval (CI) 64 to 77 years) in all affected subjects. There was a significant difference in survival between subjects according to the affected functional domain (p = 0.02). Significant independent predictors of decreased survival were the non-conservative (that is, associated with a change in the amino acid charge) missense mutations that affected the actin binding site (hazard ratio 4.4, 95% CI 1.6 to 11.8; p = 0.003) and those that affected the rod portion of beta MHC (hazard ratio 4.8, 95% CI 1.2 to 19.4; p = 0.03). No phenotypic characteristics were associated with decreased survival or cardiovascular morbidity. The type of beta MHC functional domain affected by the missense mutation is predictive of overall prognosis in HCM.",2 4
"Novel compound heterozygous mutations in MYO7A Associated with Usher syndrome 1 in a Chinese family. || Amino Acid Sequence Animals China Female Heterozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Myosins Pedigree Sequence Homology, Amino Acid Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome is an autosomal recessive disease characterized by sensorineural hearing loss, age-dependent retinitis pigmentosa (RP), and occasionally vestibular dysfunction. The most severe form is Usher syndrome type 1 (USH1). Mutations in the MYO7A gene are responsible for USH1 and account for 29-55% of USH1 cases. Here, we characterized a Chinese family (no. 7162) with USH1. Combining the targeted capture of 131 known deafness genes, next-generation sequencing, and bioinformatic analysis, we identified two deleterious compound heterozygous mutations in the MYO7A gene: a reported missense mutation c.73G>A (p.G25R) and a novel nonsense mutation c.462C>A (p.C154X). The two compound variants are absent in 219 ethnicity-matched controls, co-segregates with the USH clinical phenotypes, including hearing loss, vestibular dysfunction, and age-dependent penetrance of progressive RP, in family 7162. Therefore, we concluded that the USH1 in this family was caused by compound heterozygous mutations in MYO7A.",2
"Frequency and phenotypic spectrum of germline mutations in POLE and seven other polymerase genes in 266 patients with colorectal adenomas and carcinomas. || Adenoma Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Child Colorectal Neoplasms DNA Polymerase II DNA-Directed DNA Polymerase Family Health Female Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Isoenzymes Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Pedigree Phenotype Phospholipase D Poly-ADP-Ribose Binding Proteins Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Sequence Analysis, DNA Young Adult || In a number of families with colorectal adenomatous polyposis or suspected Lynch syndrome/HNPCC, no germline alteration in the APC, MUTYH, or mismatch repair (MMR) genes are found. Missense mutations in the polymerase genes POLE and POLD1 have recently been identified as rare cause of multiple colorectal adenomas and carcinomas, a condition termed polymerase proofreading-associated polyposis (PPAP). The aim of the present study was to evaluate the clinical relevance and phenotypic spectrum of polymerase germline mutations. Therefore, targeted sequencing of the polymerase genes POLD1, POLD2, POLD3, POLD4, POLE, POLE2, POLE3 and POLE4 was performed in 266 unrelated patients with polyposis or fulfilled Amsterdam criteria. The POLE mutation c.1270C>G;p.Leu424Val was detected in four unrelated patients. The mutation was present in 1.5% (4/266) of all patients, 4% (3/77) of all familial cases and 7% (2/30) of familial polyposis cases. The colorectal phenotype in 14 affected individuals ranged from typical adenomatous polyposis to a HNPCC phenotype, with high intrafamilial variability. Multiple colorectal carcinomas and duodenal adenomas were common, and one case of duodenal carcinoma was reported. Additionally, various extraintestinal lesions were evident. Nine further putative pathogenic variants were identified. The most promising was c.1306C>T;p.Pro436Ser in POLE. In conclusion, a PPAP was identified in a substantial number of polyposis and familial colorectal cancer patients. Screening for polymerase proofreading mutations should therefore be considered, particularly in unexplained familial cases. The present study broadens the phenotypic spectrum of PPAP to duodenal adenomas and carcinomas, and identified novel, potentially pathogenic variants in four polymerase genes.",2
"Prevalence of cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene mutations in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Amino Acid Sequence Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genotype Germany Humans Kyrgyzstan Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Poland Prevalence Prospective Studies Risk Factors Sequence Alignment || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a frequent, autosomal-dominant cardiac disease and manifests predominantly as left ventricular hypertrophy. Mutations in the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene (MYH7) are responsible for the disease in about 30% of cases where mutations were identified. We clinically evaluated a large group of 147 consecutive HCM patients from three cardiology centers in Germany, Poland, and Kyrgyzstan according to the same protocol. The DNA of the patients was systematically analyzed in the whole coding region of the MYH7 gene using PCR, single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis, and automated sequencing. Eleven different missense mutations (including seven novel ones) in 11 unrelated patients were identified, showing a mutation frequency of 7.5% in the study population. We further examined the families of five patients (three of German, one of Polish, and one of Kyrgyz origin) with 32 individuals in total. We observed a clear, age-dependent penetrance with onset of disease symptoms in the fourth decade of life. Genotype-phenotype correlations were different for each mutation, whereas the majority was associated with an intermediate/malign phenotype. In conclusion, we report a systematic molecular screening of the complete MYH7 gene in a large group of consecutive HCM patients, leading to a genetic diagnosis in 38 individuals. Information about the genotype in an individual from one family could be very useful for the clinician, especially when dealing with healthy relatives in doubt of their risk about developing HCM. The increasing application of genetic screening and the increasing knowledge about genotype-phenotype correlations will hopefully lead to an improved clinical management of HCM patients.",2 4
"Long-chain L 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency does not appear to be the primary cause of lipid myopathy in patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS). ||  || In order to test the hypothesis that long-chain L 3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency is associated with the lipid myopathy and muscle carnitine deficiency observed in Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS), we studied the enzyme activity in cultured skin fibroblasts from three generations of a family with a clear dominant inheritance of BRRS. Enzyme activities were normal while the germline PTEN missense mutation P246L segregated with BRRS in this family. No PTEN mutations were identified in the original patient with BRRS and LCHAD deficiency. These data suggest that the previously reported case of LCHAD and BRRS either represents the coincidental concurrence of two rare genetic events or that a gene other than PTEN is related to LCHAD and BRRS.",2 3
"Mutation profile of all 49 exons of the human myosin VIIA gene, and haplotype analysis, in Usher 1B families from diverse origins. || Amino Acid Substitution Blindness Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 11 Deafness Exons Family Genetic Markers Haplotypes Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Mutation Myosins Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic Retinitis Pigmentosa Sequence Deletion Syndrome Vestibular Diseases || Usher syndrome types I (USH1A-USH1E) are a group of autosomal recessive diseases characterized by profound congenital hearing loss, vestibular areflexia, and progressive visual loss due to retinitis pigmentosa. The human myosin VIIA gene, located on 11q14, has been shown to be responsible for Usher syndrome type 1B (USH1B). Haplotypes were constructed in 28 USH1 families by use of the following polymorphic markers spanning the USH1B locus: D11S787, D11S527, D11S1789, D11S906, D11S4186, and OMP. Affected individuals and members of their families from 12 different ethnic origins were screened for the presence of mutations in all 49 exons of the myosin VIIA gene. In 15 families myosin VIIA mutations were detected, verifying their classification as USH1B. All these mutations are novel, including three missense mutations, one premature stop codon, two splicing mutations, one frameshift, and one deletion of >2 kb comprising exons 47 and 48, a part of exon 49, and the introns between them. Three mutations were shared by more than one family, consistent with haplotype similarities. Altogether, 16 USH1B haplotypes were observed in the 15 families; most haplotypes were population specific. Several exonic and intronic polymorphisms were also detected. None of the 20 known USH1B mutations reported so far in other world populations were identified in our families.",2 1
"Differences in clinical expression of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated with two distinct mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene. A 908Leu----Val mutation and a 403Arg----Gln mutation. || Adolescent Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Blotting, Southern Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 Death, Sudden, Cardiac Echocardiography Electrocardiography Female Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Myosins Pedigree Polymerase Chain Reaction || The disease gene for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) has been identified as the beta-myosin heavy chain (beta-MHC) gene in some HCM families. We describe extensive clinical evaluations in two kindreds with two distinct point mutations in the beta-MHC gene. We used single-strand confirmation polymorphism (SSCP) gel analysis of polymerase chain reaction-amplified products capturing each of the 40 beta-MHC gene exons to identify distinct missense mutations in two HCM kindreds. Clinical, ECG, and echocardiographic studies were performed in the two kindreds: kindred 2755 with amino acid 908Leu----Val mutation and kindred 2002 with amino acid 403Arg----Gln mutation. The morphological appearances of HCM were similar in these two kindreds. However, the two kindreds differed with respect to disease penetrance, age of onset of disease, and incidence of premature sudden death. Twelve of 31 adults (greater than or equal to 17 years) with the disease gene in kindred 2755 did not have left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), and only five of these had ECG abnormalities. Thus, the disease penetrance in adults with this mutation was only 61%. None of 11 children aged less than 16 years had LVH. The 908 mutation was associated with a low incidence of cardiac events: Only two sudden deaths and one syncope occurred in 46 individuals with the mutant allele. In contrast, LVH was present in all 11 adults in kindred 2002 with the 403 mutation (100% disease penetrance). In addition, three of four affected children were symptomatic and had clinical evidence of HCM. The disease in this kindred was severe and resulted in six premature sudden deaths. Seven additional patients had syncope or presyncope. In some kindreds, the HCM disease gene is more prevalent than indicated by echocardiography and ECG. Some point mutations may be associated with a more malignant prognosis. Preclinical identification of children with mutations associated with a high incidence of sudden death and syncope provides the opportunity to evaluate efficacy of early therapeutic interventions.",2 4
"Early detection of adrenocortical carcinoma in a child with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. || Adrenal Cortex Neoplasms Adrenocortical Carcinoma Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Early Detection of Cancer Female Genetic Counseling Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Pedigree Point Mutation Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || We report an early detection of cancer in a child with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. The proband was a 3-year-old male with a primitive mesenchymal tumor. Genetic analysis showed a germline TP53 mutation in codon 220 exon 6, which changed TAT --> TGT and resulted in a tyrosine-to-cysteine amino acid substitution (Tyr220Cys). The younger sister at risk was followed, and an asymptomatic adrenal cortical carcinoma was detected 3 years later. The report highlights the importance of genetic counseling and provides an example of early detection of cancers in childhood LFS carriers.",2
"Compound and double mutations in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: implications for genetic testing and counselling. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Cohort Studies Female Genetic Counseling Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Diagnostic Techniques Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Sequence Analysis, DNA || To report the frequency of single and multiple gene mutations in an Australian cohort of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Genetic screening of seven HCM genes (beta-MHC, MyBP-C, cTnT, cTnI, ACTC, MYL2, and MYL3) was undertaken in 80 unrelated probands. Screening was by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography and direct DNA sequencing. Clinical data were collected on all patients and on genotyped family members. 26 mutations were identified in 23 families (29%). Nineteen probands (24%) had single mutations (11 beta-MHC, 4 MyBP-C, 3 cTnI, 1 cTnT). Multiple gene mutations were identified in four probands (5%): one had a double mutation and the others had compound mutations. Six of 14 affected individuals from multiple mutation families (43%) experienced a sudden cardiac death event, compared with 10 of 55 affected members (18%) from single mutation families (p = 0.05). There was an increase in septal wall thickness in patients with compound mutations (mean (SD): 30.7 (3.1) v 24.4 (7.4) mm; p<0.05). Multiple gene mutations occurring in HCM families may result in a more severe clinical phenotype because of a ""double dose"" effect. This highlights the importance of screening the entire panel of HCM genes even after a single mutation has been identified.",2 4
"Identification of seven novel germline mutations in the human E-cadherin (CDH1) gene. ||  || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is a cancer predisposition syndrome caused by germline mutation of the gene encoding the tumour-suppressor E-cadherin (CDH1). We describe the search for CDH1 mutations in 36 new diffuse gastric cancer families. All 16 CDH1 exons, neighbouring intronic sequence and an essential promoter region were screened by DNA sequencing. We detected nine different mutations, seven of which were novel. Of the seven novel mutations, five were identified in families who met the IGCLC clinical criteria for HDGC. Two mutations resulted in a premature stop codon and truncation of the protein. Three mutations affected splice sites; two of the splice-site mutations were shown by RT-PCR to disturb normal CDH1 splicing, while the third splice-site mutation was present in two unrelated HDGC families. The remaining two mutations resulted in amino acid substitutions and impaired the ability of E-cadherin protein to form cellular aggregates and suppress invasion in vitro. Together with the occurrence of extra-gastric tumours such as lobular breast and colorectal cancer, these findings further extend the types of CDH1 mutations and the spectrum of tumours associated with HDGC.",2 4 0 3
"A search for three known RYR1 gene mutations in 41 Swedish families with predisposition to malignant hyperthermia. ||  || Eight mutations in the gene (the RYR1 gene) encoding the calcium release channel of sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) in skeletal muscle are so far known to be very closely linked to malignant hyperthermia susceptibility in man and are regarded to be causative. We have examined 41 Swedish families where malignant hyperthermia had occurred in at least one member during anaesthesia, with respect to three of the known mutations. The mutations were Arg163Cys; Ile403Met and Arg614Cys (also known as the ""pig mutation""). In three (i.e. 7%) of the families we detected the Arg614Cys mutation, and this was the only one of the mutations searched for that was observed. This indicates that other mutations than those searched for in this study must cause malignant hyperthermia susceptibility in most Swedish malignant hyperthermia susceptible families.",2
"The alpha-galactosidase A p.Arg118Cys variant does not cause a Fabry disease phenotype: data from individual patients and family studies. || Adult Alleles Amino Acid Substitution Codon Fabry Disease Family Health Female Gene Frequency Genotype Humans Kidney Male Middle Aged Molecular Structure Mutation Phenotype alpha-Galactosidase || Lysosomal α-galactosidase A (α-Gal) is the enzyme deficient in Fabry disease (FD), an X-linked glycosphingolipidosis caused by pathogenic mutations affecting the GLA gene. The early-onset, multi-systemic FD classical phenotype is associated with absent or severe enzyme deficiency, as measured by in vitro assays, but patients with higher levels of residual α-Gal activity may have later-onset, more organ-restricted clinical presentations. A change in the codon 118 of the wild-type α-Gal sequence, replacing basic arginine by a potentially sulfhydryl-binding cysteine residue - GLA p.(Arg118Cys) -, has been recurrently described in large FD screening studies of high-risk patients. Although the Cys118 allele is associated with high residual α-Gal activity in vitro, it has been classified as a pathogenic mutation, mainly on the basis of theoretical arguments about the chemistry of the cysteine residue. However its pathogenicity has never been convincingly demonstrated by pathology criteria. We reviewed the clinical, biochemical and histopathology data obtained from 22 individuals of Portuguese and Spanish ancestry carrying the Cys118 allele, including 3 homozygous females. Cases were identified either on the differential diagnosis of possible FD manifestations and on case-finding studies (n=11; 4 males), or on unbiased cascade screening of probands' close relatives (n=11; 3 males). Overall, those data strongly suggest that the GLA p.(Arg118Cys) variant does not segregate with FD clinical phenotypes in a Mendelian fashion, but might be a modulator of the multifactorial risk of cerebrovascular disease. The Cys118 allelic frequency in healthy Portuguese adults (n=696) has been estimated as 0.001, therefore not qualifying for ""rare"" condition.",2 0 3
"Does the aspartic acid to asparagine substitution at position 76 in the pancreas duodenum homeobox gene (PDX1) cause late-onset type 2 diabetes? || Age of Onset Amino Acid Substitution Asparagine Aspartic Acid Case-Control Studies Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Europe European Continental Ancestry Group Female Homeodomain Proteins Humans Insulin Male Mutation, Missense Pedigree Trans-Activators United States || Considerable data support an inherited defect in insulin secretion as one component of type 2 diabetes. Coding variants of the pancreas duodenum homeobox gene (PDX1) were proposed to predispose late-onset type 2 diabetes and to decrease transactivation in vitro. We tested the hypothesis that the Asp76Asn (D76N) variant that was identified in several populations predisposed type 2 diabetes and reduced insulin secretion. We performed a case-control study in 191 control subjects and 190 individuals with type 2 diabetes, all of European descent, then characterized the D76N variant in 704 members of 68 families. We compared the phenotypic characteristics of those with and without the variant by diagnostic status and determined the insulin secretory response to intravenous glucose and tolbutamide among nondiabetic family members. D76N was not associated with type 2 diabetes, either in our population or when all reported studies in Caucasians were combined. D76N did not segregate with diabetes among the families examined. Among D76N carriers, nondiabetic individuals had a lower waist-to-hip ratio and a trend to lower BMI than their diabetic counterparts. Diabetic carriers of D76N were significantly leaner by BMI (P = 0.012) and tended to be younger than diabetic individuals with the D/D genotype. However, insulin secretion in response to oral and intravenous glucose challenge and to intravenous tolbutamide was not reduced in D76N carriers. The D76N variant of PDX1 does not significantly alter insulin secretion or act as a high-risk susceptibility allele for late-onset type 2 diabetes as proposed previously, although we cannot exclude a minor role in increasing risk of diabetes.",2
Clinical heterogeneity in a family with mutations in USH2A. ||  || ,2 3
"Phenotypes in three pedigrees with autosomal dominant obesity caused by haploinsufficiency mutations in the melanocortin-4 receptor gene. || Adolescent Age Factors Aged Aged, 80 and over Body Constitution Body Mass Index Child Codon, Terminator Female Genes, Dominant Germany Heterozygote Humans Leptin Lod Score Male Middle Aged Mutation Obesity Pedigree Penetrance Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Peptide Sex Factors || Recently, haploinsufficiency mutations in the melanocortin-4 receptor gene (MC4-R) were detected which were assumed to lead to the phenotype of extreme obesity. Previously, we detected three obese carriers among 306 index patients. Here we describe the detection of one haploinsufficiency carrier in an additional study group of 186 obese individuals. We subsequently genotyped and phenotyped 43 family members of these four index patients, two of whom were second-degree cousins. A total of 19 carriers were identified. Extreme obesity was the predominating phenotype. However, moderate obesity occurred in three of the carriers. No other specific phenotypic abnormalities were detected. Female haploinsufficiency carriers were heavier than male carriers in the respective families, a finding similar to findings in MC4-R-knockout mice. In conclusion, our data fully support the etiologic role of MC4-R haploinsufficiency mutations in obesity.",2 4
"Identification of five novel mutations in the long isoform of the USH2A gene in Chinese families with Usher syndrome type II. || Adolescent Amino Acid Sequence Asian Continental Ancestry Group Base Sequence Child China DNA Mutational Analysis Extracellular Matrix Proteins Family Female Fundus Oculi Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Protein Isoforms Sequence Alignment Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome type II (USH2) is the most common form of Usher syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by moderate to severe hearing loss, postpuberal onset of retinitis pigmentosa (RP), and normal vestibular function. Mutations in the USH2A gene have been shown to be responsible for most cases of USH2. To further elucidate the role of USH2A in USH2, mutation screening was undertaken in three Chinese families with USH2. Three unrelated Chinese families, consisting of six patients and 10 unaffected relatives, were examined clinically, and 100 normal Chinese individuals served as controls. Genomic DNA was extracted from the venous blood of all participants. The coding region (exons 2-72), including the intron-exon boundary of USH2A, was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The PCR products amplified from the three probands were analyzed using direct sequencing to screen sequence variants. Whenever substitutions were identified in a patient, restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis, or single strand conformation polymorphism analysis was performed on all available family members and the control group. Fundus examination revealed typical fundus features of RP, including narrowing of the vessels, bone-speckle pigmentation, and waxy optic discs. The ERG wave amplitudes of three probands were undetectable. Audiometric tests indicated moderate to severe sensorineural hearing impairment. Vestibular function was normal. Five novel mutations (one small insertion, one small deletion, one nonsense, one missense, and one splice site) were detected in three families after sequence analysis of USH2A. Of the five mutations, four were located in exons 22-72, specific to the long isoform of USH2A. The mutations found in our study broaden the spectrum of USH2A mutations. Our results further indicate that the long isoform of USH2A may harbor even more mutations of the USH2A gene.",2 1
"Focal sclerosis of semicircular canals with severe DFNA9 hearing impairment caused by a P51S COCH-mutation: is there a link? ||  || Focal sclerosis of one or more semicircular canals on computed tomographic (CT) scans and a corresponding signal loss on magnetic resonance (MR) imaging are radiologic lesions that are linked to patients who are suffering from advanced otovestibular impairment caused by hereditary DFNA9 hearing loss. DFNA9 is a hereditary hearing loss that is characterized by late-onset progressive imbalance and hearing deterioration, caused by mutations in the COCH gene. To date, no radiologic lesions have been associated with this condition. A retrospective chart review Tertiary referral center The radiologic data of 9 patients who presented between 2007 and 2012 with otovestibular deterioration caused by a mutation in the COCH gene were reviewed. All 9 subjects were carriers of the same c.151C > T, p.Pro51Ser (P51S) - missense mutation in the COCH gene. In 8 of them similar sclerotic lesions and/or narrowing were demonstrated in one or more semicircular canals on computed tomography CT scan, with a signal loss at corresponding areas on T2-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) images. In 1 patient, the posterior part of the vestibule was also affected. The posterior canals were affected in most cases (58%), compared with the superior (21%) and lateral canals (16%) or the vestibule (5%). Only 68.4% of the lesions on MR images were also visible on CT scans, suggesting a fibrotic process without calcification. Ears presenting radiologic lesions showed significantly more severe hearing loss (median PTA 104 dB HL) compared with unaffected ears (58 dB HL). Eight of 9 subjects with the same P51S mutation in the COCH gene showed similar radiologic lesions, affecting the PSCC in the majority of the cases. These radiologic abnormalities occurred in more advanced stages of the otovestibular deterioration, supporting the hypothesis that these lesions might represent the end phase of a low-grade chronic inflammation or protein deposition. A new phenotypic and characteristic radiologic feature of DFNA9 has been discovered.",2
"Germ-line mutations of TP53 in Li-Fraumeni families: an extended study of 39 families. || Female Genes, p53 Genetic Linkage Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Mutation Promoter Regions, Genetic || We have previously reported on the analysis of TP53 coding mutations in 12 classic Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) families plus 9 families that were Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) families (J. M. Birch et al., Cancer Res., 54: 1298-1304, 1994). Mutations were found in 6 of 12 LFS families and in 1 of 9 LFL families. We have now extended these studies to include an additional nine LFS and nine LFL families, and TP53 mutations have been detected in eight of nine LFS families and in three of nine LFL families. Six of the new mutations described here are the same as those previously identified in other Li-Fraumeni families and are missense mutations at codons 245, 248, and 273 (in two families); a nonsense mutation at codon 209; and a mutation at the splice donor site in exon 4. The other five mutations are novel germ-line mutations and include missense mutations at codons 136 and 344, a 2-bp deletion within codon 191, a splice acceptor mutation in intron 3, and a 167-bp deletion of part of exon 1 and intron 1. In addition, we have detected a codon 175 mutation in a family previously reported as TP53 negative. To summarize all of the data from the families we have studied in this and our previous report (J. M. Birch et al., Cancer Res., 54: 1298-1304, 1994), mutations have been detected in 15 of 21 LFS families (71%) and in 4 of 18 LFL families (22%). These figures are somewhat higher than those previously reported by us and others for the frequency of TP53 mutations in LFS and LFL families. This could reflect our analysis of all 11 exons of TP53, including noncoding regions, as well as the use of direct sequencing rather than other less-sensitive mutation detection methods.",2
"Haematological spectrum and genotype-phenotype correlations in nine unrelated families with RUNX1 mutations from the French network on inherited platelet disorders. || Adolescent Adult Blood Coagulation Disorders, Inherited Blood Platelet Disorders Child Child, Preschool Comparative Genomic Hybridization Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit Female Genetic Association Studies Humans Infant Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Thrombocytopenia Young Adult || Less than 50 patients with FPD/AML (OMIM 601309) have been reported as of today and there may an underestimation. The purpose of this study was to describe the natural history, the haematological features and the genotype-phenotype correlations of this entity in order to, first, screen it better and earlier, before leukaemia occurrence and secondly to optimize appropriate monitoring and treatment, in particular when familial stem cell transplantation is considered. We have investigated 41 carriers of RUNX1 alteration belonging to nine unrelated French families with FPD/AML and two syndromic patients, registered in the French network on rare platelet disorders from 2005 to 2015. Five missense, one non-sense, three frameshift mutations and two large deletions involving several genes including RUNX1 were evidenced. The history of familial leukaemia was suggestive of FPD/AML in seven pedigrees, whereas an autosomal dominant pattern of lifelong thrombocytopenia was the clinical presentation of two. Additional syndromic features characterized two large sporadic deletions. Bleeding tendency was mild and thrombocytopenia moderate (>50 x10(9)/L), with normal platelet volume. A functional platelet defect consistent with a δ-granule release defect was found in ten patients regardless of the type of RUNX1 alteration. The incidence of haematological malignancies was higher when the mutated RUNX1 allele was likely to cause a dominant negative effect (19/34) in comparison with loss of function alleles (3/9). A normal platelet count does not rule out the diagnosis of FPD/AML, since the platelet count was found normal for three mutated subjects, a feature that has a direct impact in the search for a related donor in case of allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Platelet dysfunction suggestive of defective δ-granule release could be of values for the diagnosis of FPD/AML particularly when the clinical presentation is an autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia with normal platelet size in the absence of familial malignancies. The genotype-phenotype correlations might be helpful in genetic counselling and appropriate optimal therapeutic management.",2 4
"Comprehensive sequence analysis of nine Usher syndrome genes in the UK National Collaborative Usher Study. || Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Multifactorial Inheritance Mutation Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide United Kingdom Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome (USH) is an autosomal recessive disorder comprising retinitis pigmentosa, hearing loss and, in some cases, vestibular dysfunction. It is clinically and genetically heterogeneous with three distinctive clinical types (I-III) and nine Usher genes identified. This study is a comprehensive clinical and genetic analysis of 172 Usher patients and evaluates the contribution of digenic inheritance. The genes MYO7A, USH1C, CDH23, PCDH15, USH1G, USH2A, GPR98, WHRN, CLRN1 and the candidate gene SLC4A7 were sequenced in 172 UK Usher patients, regardless of clinical type. No subject had definite mutations (nonsense, frameshift or consensus splice site mutations) in two different USH genes. Novel missense variants were classified UV1-4 (unclassified variant): UV4 is 'probably pathogenic', based on control frequency <0.23%, identification in trans to a pathogenic/probably pathogenic mutation and segregation with USH in only one family; and UV3 ('likely pathogenic') as above, but no information on phase. Overall 79% of identified pathogenic/UV4/UV3 variants were truncating and 21% were missense changes. MYO7A accounted for 53.2%, and USH1C for 14.9% of USH1 families (USH1C:c.496+1G>A being the most common USH1 mutation in the cohort). USH2A was responsible for 79.3% of USH2 families and GPR98 for only 6.6%. No mutations were found in USH1G, WHRN or SLC4A7. One or two pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were identified in 86% of cases. No convincing cases of digenic inheritance were found. It is concluded that digenic inheritance does not make a significant contribution to Usher syndrome; the observation of multiple variants in different genes is likely to reflect polymorphic variation, rather than digenic effects.",2 1 3
"Analyses of Genetic and Clinical Parameters for Screening Patients With Inherited Thrombocytopenia with Small or Normal-Sized Platelets. || Adolescent Blood Platelets Cell Size Child Child, Preschool Chromosome Deletion Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit Family Female Genetic Diseases, Inborn Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Nuclear Proteins Signal Transduction Thrombocytopenia Thrombopoiesis Thrombopoietin Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome Protein || Childhood thrombocytopenias include immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and inherited thrombocytopenia; the former is caused by autoantibodies to platelets, whereas the latter can be distinguished by platelet size and underlying genetic mutations. Due to limited methods for the definite diagnosis of ITP, genetic and clinical parameters are required for diagnosing inherited thrombocytopenias with small or normal-sized platelets. In total, 32 Japanese patients with thrombocytopenia with small or normal-sized platelets from 29 families were enrolled. All the patients were under 20 years of age, with family histories of early-onset thrombocytopenia and/or poor response to conventional therapies for ITP. Genotypes and clinical parameters were retrospectively evaluated according to the disease type. Twelve cases of inherited thrombocytopenia were observed. We identified chromosomal deletions within the WASP gene in two patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome; a missense mutation in a patient with X-linked thrombocytopenia; and mutations in the RUNX1 gene of five patients with familial platelet disorder with propensity to acute myelogenous leukemia, and in the ANKRD26 gene of four patients with autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia-2. All 12 carried germline mutations, three of which were de novo. Furthermore, we observed significantly elevated serum thrombopoietin (TPO) levels and dysplasia of megakaryocytes in patients carrying the RUNX1 and ANKRD26 mutations. Genetic analyses and detection of TPO levels and dysmegakaryopoiesis were clinically useful for screening patients with inherited thrombocytopenias, irrespective of the family history. We hypothesize that the WASP, RUNX1, and ANKRD26 genes are important for normal TPO signaling and the network underlying thrombopoiesis.",2 4
"CDH1 truncating mutations in the E-cadherin gene: an indication for total gastrectomy to treat hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. || Adenocarcinoma Anastomosis, Roux-en-Y Biopsy Breast Neoplasms Cadherins Carcinoma, Signet Ring Cell Diagnostic Imaging Female Gastrectomy Gastroscopy Humans Lymph Node Excision Male Middle Aged Mutation Neoplasm Staging Occult Blood Pedigree Primary Prevention Prospective Studies Quality of Life Stomach Neoplasms Treatment Outcome || Approximately 1% to 3% of all gastric cancers are associated with families exhibiting an autosomal dominant pattern of susceptibility. E-cadherin (CDH1) truncating mutations have been shown to be present in approximately 30% of families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) and are associated with a significantly increased risk of gastric cancer and lobular breast cancer. Individuals from a large kindred with HDGC who were identified to have a CDH1 mutation prospectively underwent comprehensive screening with stool occult blood testing, standard upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with random gastric biopsies, high-magnification endoscopy with random gastric biopsies, endoscopic ultrasonography, CT, and PET scans to evaluate the stomach for occult cancer. Subsequently, they each underwent total gastrectomy with D-2 node dissection and Roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy. The stomach and resected lymph nodes were evaluated pathologically. Six patients were identified as CDH1 carriers from a single family. There were 2 men and 4 women. The mean age was 54 years (range, 51-57 years). No patient had any signs or symptoms of gastric cancer. Exhaustive preoperative stomach evaluation was normal in each case, and the stomach and adjacent lymph nodes appeared normal at surgery. However, each patient (6 of 6, 100%) was found to have multiple foci of T1 invasive diffuse gastric adenocarcinoma (pure signet-ring cell type). No patient had lymph node or distant metastases. Each was staged as T1N0M0. Each patient recovered uneventfully without morbidity or mortality. CDH1 mutations in individuals from families with HDGC are associated with gastric cancer in a highly penetrant fashion. CDH1 mutations are an indication for total gastrectomy in these patients. This mutation will identify patients with cancer before other detectable symptoms or signs of the disease.",2
"Identification and molecular modelling of a mutation in the motor head domain of myosin VIIA in a family with autosomal dominant hearing impairment (DFNA11). || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Dyneins Genes, Dominant Hearing Loss Humans Models, Molecular Mutation Myosins Pedigree || Myosin VIIA is an unconventional myosin that has been implicated in Usher syndrome type 1B, atypical Usher syndrome, non-syndromic autosomal recessive hearing impairment (DFNB2) and autosomal dominant hearing impairment (DFNA11). Here, we present a family with non-syndromic autosomal dominant hearing impairment that clinically resembles the previously published DFNA11 family. The affected family members show a flat audiogram at young ages and only modest progression, most clearly at the high frequencies. In addition, they suffer from minor vestibular symptoms. Linkage analysis yielded a maximum two-point lodscore of 3.43 for marker D11S937 located within 1 cM of the myosin VIIA gene. The myosin VIIA gene was sequenced and 11 nucleotide variations were found. Ten nucleotide changes represent benign intronic variants, silent exon mutations or non-pathologic amino acid substitutions. One variant, a c.1373A-->T transversion that is heterozygously present in all affected family members and absent in 300 healthy individuals, is predicted to result in an Asn458Ile amino acid substitution. Asn458 is located in a region of the myosin VIIA motor domain that is highly conserved in different classes of myosins and in myosins of different species. To evaluate whether the Asn458Ile mutation was indeed responsible for the hearing impairment, a molecular model of myosin VIIA was built based on the known structure of the myosin II heavy chain from Dictyostelium discoideum. In this model, conformational changes in the protein caused by the amino acid substitution Asn458Ile are predicted to disrupt ATP/ADP binding and impair the myosin power-stroke, which would have a severe effect on the function of the myosin VIIA protein.",2
"Uptake of cardiac screening and genetic testing among hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy families. ||  || Cardiomyopathy is a genetically and clinically heterogeneous, life threatening disease which affects people of all ages. Recent guidelines provide recommendations for cardiac screening and genetic testing in at-risk relatives, but the uptake and impact of these measures in the United States is unknown. This is a single institution retrospective study that characterizes the uptake of cardiac screening and genetic testing for relatives of a cohort of 57 probands with hypertrophic (HCM) and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) who underwent both clinical evaluation and genetic testing. Cardiac screening was indicated for 302 relatives. One hundred and seventy-three (57 %) completed cardiac screening. Forty of the 57 probands were mutation positive and genetic testing was indicated for 213 relatives. Eighty-four (39 %) completed genetic testing. The uptake of cardiac surveillance was greater than the uptake of genetic testing (p < 0.0001) among relatives of mutation positive probands. Within the group of at-risk, asymptomatic relatives of probands, cardiac screening and genetic testing were positive in 25 % and 40 % of cases, respectively. These data demonstrate the important role and utility of cascade cardiac screening and genetic testing in the care of patients and families with HCM or DCM. The approach to cardiac screening and genetic testing should be family-specific and requires expertise in the genetics of cardiomyopathy.",2 4
"Targeted high-throughput sequencing identifies pathogenic mutations in KCNQ4 in two large Chinese families with autosomal dominant hearing loss. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Amino Acid Sequence Audiometry Child Child, Preschool China DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Order Genes, Dominant Genotype Hearing Loss, Sensorineural High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans KCNQ Potassium Channels Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Sequence Alignment Young Adult || Autosomal dominant non-syndromic hearing loss (ADNSHL) is highly heterogeneous, among them, KCNQ4 is one of the most frequent disease-causing genes. More than twenty KCNQ4 mutations have been reported, but none of them were detected in Chinese mainland families. In this study, we identified a novel KCNQ4 mutation in a five generation Chinese family with 84 members and a known KCNQ4 mutation in a six generation Chinese family with 66 members. Mutation screening of 30 genes for ADNSHL was performed in the probands from thirty large Chinese families with ADNSHL by targeted region capture and high-throughput sequencing. The candidate variants and the co-segregation of the phenotype were verified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification and Sanger sequencing in all ascertained family members. Then we identified a novel KCNQ4 mutation p.W275R in exon 5 and a known KCNQ4 mutation p.G285S in exon 6 in two large Chinese ADNSHL families segregating with post-lingual high frequency-involved and progressive sensorineural hearing loss. This is the first report of KCNQ4 mutation in Chinese mainland families. KCNQ4, a member of voltage-gated potassium channel family, is likely to be a common gene in Chinese patients with ADNSHL. The results also support that the combination of targeted enrichment and high-throughput sequencing is a valuable molecular diagnostic tool for autosomal dominant hereditary deafness.",2
"A family with Fabry disease diagnosed by a single angiokeratoma. ||  || This case presents a 39-year-old gentleman with a single angiokeratoma on the abdomen. Because of a family history of early onset cardiac disease, testing for Fabry disease was performed and a mis-sense mutation (A143T) in the Fabry gene confirmed the diagnosis. The unusual aspect of this case is that the patient otherwise had normal health. His only detectable abnormality was a high serum creatinine at 116 mmol/L. Two further affected males and four carrier females were detected on family screening. We tested a further five patients with a single angiokeratoma for Fabry disease. In the five tested though, no suggestive personal or family history was given for any of the patients and no further cases were detected. This case highlights the need for vigilance within dermatology clinics to consider Fabry disease even if a solitary angiokeratoma is the only presenting feature. Some patients do display a milder phenotype and thus a detailed family history should always be taken. As in this case, a solitary angiokeratoma and a suspicious family history may be the only clue. Because enzyme replacement therapy is now available, the potential benefits for the patient and their family are high.",2 3
"Identification of a new missense mutation at Arg403, a CpG mutation hotspot, in exon 13 of the beta-myosin heavy chain gene in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Exons Genes Humans Molecular Sequence Data Myosins Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction || ",2 4
"Application of whole-exome sequencing to direct the specific functional testing and diagnosis of rare inherited bleeding disorders in patients from the Öresund Region, Scandinavia. || Blood Coagulation Disorders, Inherited Denmark Exome Female Genome-Wide Association Study Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Sweden || Rare inherited bleeding disorders (IBD) are a common cause of bleeding tendency. To ensure a correct diagnosis, specialized laboratory analyses are necessary. This study reports the results of an upfront diagnostic strategy using targeted whole exome sequencing. In total, 156 patients with a significant bleeding assessment tool score participated in the study, of which a third had thrombocytopenia. Eighty-seven genes specifically associated with genetic predisposition to bleeding were analysed by whole exome sequencing. Variants were classified according to the five-tier scheme. We identified 353 germline variants. Eight patients (5%) harboured a known pathogenic variant. Of the 345 previously unknown variants, computational analyses predicted 99 to be significant. Further filtration according to the Mendelian inheritance pattern, resulted in 59 variants being predicted to be clinically significant. Moreover, 34% (20/59) were assigned as novel class 4 or 5 variants upon targeted functional testing. A class 4 or 5 variant was identified in 30% of patients with thrombocytopenia (14/47) versus 11% of patients with a normal platelet count (12/109) (P < 0·01). An IBD diagnosis has a major clinical impact. The genetic investigations detailed here extricated our patients from a diagnostic conundrum, thus demonstrating that continuous optimization of the diagnostic work-up of IBD is of great benefit.",2 4
"Novel mutation of the PTEN gene in an Italian Cowden's disease kindred. ||  || Cowden disease (CD) is an autosomal dominant multiple hamartoma syndrome with an elevated risk of thyroid and breast cancers. The CD susceptibility gene has recently been identified as the PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 gene localized at 10q23 and coding for a dual specificity protein phosphatase. We report the mutational analysis of the PTEN gene in one Italian CD kindred. By using the single strand conformation polymorphism technique and subsequent direct DNA sequencing of the polymerase chain reaction product, we identified a novel mutation in the exon 5 of the PTEN gene. A heterozygous germline TGT-TAT transition was detected at the nucleotide 407; this causes the amino acid substitution cys136-tyr136 and the generation of a new NSI I restriction site. This mutation was not detected in the unaffected member of the family thereby indicating that it is causally linked to the disease. We ruled out that this mutation is a polymorphic variant because it was not detected in over 100 chromosomes analyzed. Using reverse trancriptase-polymerase chain reaction, we detected the expression of the mutant allele in lymphocytes and pathological tissues from an affected member of the family.",2 3
"Mutations in SDCCAG8/NPHP10 Cause Bardet-Biedl Syndrome and Are Associated with Penetrant Renal Disease and Absent Polydactyly. ||  || The ciliopathies are an expanding group of disorders caused by mutations in genes implicated in the biogenesis and function of primary cilia. Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a model ciliopathy characterized by progressive retinal degeneration, obesity, polydactyly, cognitive impairment, kidney anomalies and hypogonadism. Mutations in SDCCAG8(NPHP10) were described recently in patients with nephronophthisis and retinal degeneration (Senior-Loken syndrome; SLS). Given the phenotypic and genetic overlap between known ciliopathy genes, we hypothesized that mutations in SDCCAG8 might also contribute alleles to more severe, multisystemic ciliopathies. We performed genetic and phenotypic analyses of 2 independent BBS cohorts. Subsequent to mutation screening, we made a detailed phenotypic analysis of 5 families mutated for SDCCAG8 (3 homozygous and 2 compound heterozygous mutations) and conducted statistical analyses across both cohorts to examine possible phenotype-genotype correlations with mutations at this locus. All patients with mutations in SDCCAG8 fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for BBS (retinal degeneration, obesity, cognitive defects, renal failure, hypogonadism). Interestingly, none of the patients with primary SDCCAG8 mutations had polydactyly, a frequent but not obligatory BBS feature. In contrast, the same patients displayed early-onset renal failure, obesity, as well as recurrent pulmonary and ENT infections. Comparison of the phenotypes of these families with our entire BBS cohort indicated that renal impairment and absent polydactyly correlated significantly with causal SDCCAG8 mutations. Thus, SDCCAG8 mutations are sufficient to cause BBS in 1-2% of our combined cohorts, and define this gene as the sixteenth BBS locus (BBS16). The absence of polydactyly and the concomitant, apparently fully penetrant association with early kidney failure represents the first significant genotype-phenotype correlation in BBS that potentially represents an indicator for phenotype-driven priority screening and informs specific patient management.",2
"Assessment of diastolic function with Doppler tissue imaging to predict genotype in preclinical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adult Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Diastole Echocardiography, Doppler Electrocardiography Female Genotype Humans Male Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains || Unexplained left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is considered diagnostic of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) but fails to identify all genetically affected individuals. Altered diastolic function has been hypothesized to represent an earlier manifestation of HCM before the development of LVH; however, data regarding the clinical utility of imaging techniques that assess this parameter are limited. Echocardiographic studies including Doppler tissue imaging (DTI) were performed in a genotyped HCM population with beta-myosin heavy chain (beta -MHC) mutations. Genotype (+) individuals with LVH (G+/LVH+; n=18) and genotype (+) individuals without LVH (G+/LVH-; n=18) were compared with normal control subjects (n=36). Left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) was significantly higher in both genotype (+) groups (75+/-5% and 71+/-6%, respectively, versus 64+/- 5% in control subjects; P<0.0001). Mean early diastolic myocardial velocities (Ea) were significantly lower in both genotype (+) subgroups, irrespective of LVH (P<0.02). However, there was substantial overlap in Ea velocities between the G+/LVH- and control groups. An Ea velocity of < or =13.5 cm/s had 86% specificity and 75% sensitivity for identifying genotype-positive subjects. The combination of EF > or =68% and Ea velocity <15 cm/s was 100% specific and 44% sensitive in predicting affected genotype. Abnormalities of diastolic function assessed by Doppler tissue imaging precede the development of LVH in individuals with HCM caused by beta -MHC mutations. Although Ea velocity alone was not sufficiently sensitive as a sole diagnostic criterion, the combination of Ea velocity and EF was highly predictive of affected genotype in individuals without overt manifestations of HCM.",2 4
"Molecular and in silico analyses of the full-length isoform of usherin identify new pathogenic alleles in Usher type II patients. ||  || The usherin gene (USH2A) has been screened for mutations causing Usher syndrome type II (USH2). Two protein isoforms have been identified: a short isoform of 1,546 amino acids and a more recently recognized isoform extending to 5,202 amino acids. We have screened the full length by genomic sequencing. We confirm that many mutations occur in the exons contributing solely to the longer form. USH2 is an autosomal recessive disorder and, in contrast to previous studies, both mutations were identified in 23 patients and a single mutation in 2 out of 33 patients. A total of 34 distinct mutated alleles were identified, including one complex allele with three variants and another with two. A total of 27 of these are novel, confirming that most mutations in usherin are private. Many of the mutations will lead to prematurely truncated protein but as there are a substantial number of missense variants, we have used in silico analysis to assess their pathogenicity. Evidence that they are disease-causing has been produced by protein alignments and three-dimensional (3D) structural predictions when possible. We have identified a previously unrecognized cysteine rich structural domain, containing 12 dicysteine repeats, and show that three missense mutations result in the loss of one of a pair of the defining cysteine-cysteine pairs.",2 1 3
"LEOPARD syndrome with partly normal skin and sex chromosome mosaicism. || Adolescent Humans LEOPARD Syndrome Male Mosaicism Point Mutation Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Skin XYY Karyotype || We report on a family with LEOPARD syndrome which was molecularly proven (p.Thr468Met in PTPN11) in a father and his adult son. The father had multiple lentigines dispersed equally over his body; the son was similarly affected except for the left part of thorax, back and left arm, which were completely devoid of lentigines and only showed a few nevi. In addition, the son was found to have a mosaic karyotype, 47,XYY/46,XY, in lymphocytes. Skin biopsies from the pigmented and unpigmented forearm showed that mainly a 47,XYY karyotype was present in the pigmented skin and mainly a 46,XY karyotype in the unpigmented skin. In both fibroblast cultures the PTPN11 mutation was present, and no additional mutation could be detected. We discuss the various possible explanations for this phenotype, which include the possibility of coincidence; revertant mosaicism; silencing of a second PTPN11 mutation; gene(s) located on a sex chromosome influencing the phenotype; and epigenetic influences. We favor that the co-occurrence of a sex chromosome mosaicism and mosaicism for skin symptoms in a single patient with LEOPARD syndrome is coincidence, but that mosaicism for LEOPARD skin symptoms in itself may well be more frequent and needs additional studies. Each of the above-hypothesized mechanisms may then remain possible.",2 4
"Clinical challenges of genotype positive (+)-phenotype negative (-) family members in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Electrocardiography Family Genetic Testing Genotype Humans Magnetic Resonance Imaging Mutation Phenotype Sarcomeres || ",2 4
"High frequency of mutations in MODY and mitochondrial genes in Scandinavian patients with familial early-onset diabetes. || Adult Age Factors Aged Aged, 80 and over Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Leucine Zipper Transcription Factors DNA, Mitochondrial DNA-Binding Proteins Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Exons Family Female Genetic Variation Glucokinase Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4 Humans Introns Male Middle Aged Mutation Nuclear Proteins Pedigree Phosphoproteins Point Mutation Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Promoter Regions, Genetic Scandinavian and Nordic Countries Sequence Deletion Transcription Factors || To investigate the contribution of mutations in maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and mitochondrial genes to early-onset diabetes with a strong family history of diabetes in a cohort with a high prevalence of Type I (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus. Screening for sequence variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha (MODY1), glucokinase (MODY2), HNF-1alpha (MODY3) genes and mitochondrial DNA was carried out in 115 Finnish and Swedish patients with early-onset ( </= 40 years) diabetes using the single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) technique and direct sequencing. Allele frequencies were compared with 118 patients with onset of diabetes Type II (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus after the age of 40 and 92 non-diabetic control subjects without a family history of diabetes. In total 52 sequence variants were found in the HNF-1alpha, HNF-4alpha and glucokinase genes, 12 of which were considered as MODY mutations. Three families had the A3243G mutation in the mitochondrial tRNA(Leu) gene, which resulted in an overall prevalence of these mutations of 13 %. Among 115 Scandinavian families, mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene represented the most common cause of familial early-onset ( </= 40 years) diabetes: MODY3 (5.2 %) more than MODY2 (3.5 %) more than MIDD (2.6 %) more than MODY1 (1.7 %).",2 4
"Phenotypical characterization of α-galactosidase A gene mutations identified in a large Fabry disease screening program in stroke in the young. || Adult Belgium Echocardiography Electrocardiography Fabry Disease Female Genetic Testing Glycolipids Humans Male Mutation Phenotype Skin Sphingolipids Stroke Trihexosylceramides Vertebrobasilar Insufficiency Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || In the Belgian Fabry Study (BeFaS), the prevalence of Fabry disease was assessed in 1000 young patients presenting with stroke, unexplained white matter lesions or vertebrobasilar dolichoectasia. The results of the BeFaS suggested that Fabry disease may play a role in up to 1% of young patients presenting with cerebrovascular disease. However, the clinical relevance was unclear in all cases. We report on detailed phenotyping in subjects identified with α-galactosidase A (α-Gal A) enzyme deficiency or GLA mutations identified in the BeFaS (n=10), and on the results of family screening in this population. Family screening was performed to identify additional mutation carriers. Biochemical and/or clinical evaluation of all subjects (BeFaS index patients and relatives carrying a GLA mutation) was performed. Genetic family screening revealed 18 additional GLA mutation carriers. Bloodspot α-Gal A enzyme activity was normal in all GLA mutation carriers, even in 2 males with the p.A143T mutation. Plasma Gb3 and lyso-Gb3 levels were normal in all subjects. Elevated Gb3 in urine was detected in 2 subjects. Some classic clinical signs of Fabry disease, like angiokeratoma or cornea verticillata, could not be detected in our population. Cardiac symptoms of Fabry disease were found in 6 out of 10 p.A143T carriers. No signs of cerebrovascular disease were found in the relatives with a GLA mutation. We could not identify mutations causing the classical clinical phenotype of Fabry disease in our cerebrovascular disease population. Enzyme activity analysis in bloodspots and plasma may fail to identify late-onset variants of Fabry disease. We recommend genetic testing when an atypical, late-onset variant of Fabry disease is suspected in a male cerebrovascular disease patient. However, this may lead to the identification of non-disease causing or controversial genetic variants.",2 0 3
"High frequency of RUNX1 biallelic alteration in acute myeloid leukemia secondary to familial platelet disorder. || Adult Blood Platelet Disorders Child Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit Family Female Gene Frequency Homozygote Humans Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute Male Middle Aged Pedigree Precancerous Conditions Young Adult || Familial platelet disorder (FPD), a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by quantitative and qualitative platelet abnormalities, is considered as a model of genetic predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). So far, monoallelic RUNX1 germline mutations have been found in 19 of 20 families with reported FPD, and the analysis of blast cells from only 5 patients at acute leukemia (AL) stage has shown no additional RUNX1 abnormality. Here, we performed RUNX1 analysis at constitutional and somatic levels in 8 persons with FPD who developed AL from 4 independent families. In addition to the germline RUNX1 mutation, we identified a second RUNX1 alteration in 6 AML cases (acquired point mutations in 4 cases and duplication of the altered RUNX1 allele associated with acquired trisomy 21 in 2 other cases). Although haploinsufficiency of RUNX1 causes FPD, our findings suggest that a second genetic event involving RUNX1 is often associated with progression to AML.",2 4
"Germline p53 mutations in a cohort with childhood sarcoma: sex differences in cancer risk. || Adolescent Adult Aging Amino Acid Substitution Bone Neoplasms Child Child, Preschool Codon Cohort Studies Exons Female Genes, p53 Genetic Carrier Screening Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Risk Factors Sarcoma Sequence Deletion Sex Characteristics Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || To characterize cancer risk in heterozygous p53 mutation carriers, we analyzed cancer incidence in 56 germline p53 mutation carriers and 3,201 noncarriers from 107 kindreds ascertained through patients with childhood soft-tissue sarcoma who were treated at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. We systematically followed members in these kindreds for cancer incidence for >20 years and evaluated their p53 gene status. We found seven kindreds with germline p53 mutations that include both missense and truncation mutation types. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed similar cancer risks between 21 missense and 35 truncation p53 mutation carriers (log-rank chi(2)=0.04; P=.84). We found a significantly higher cancer risk in female carriers than in male carriers (log-rank chi(2)=12.1; P<.001), a difference not explained by an excess of sex-specific cancer. The calculated standardized incidence ratio (SIR) showed that mutation carriers had a risk for all types of cancer that was much higher than that for the general population (SIR = 41.1; 95% confidence interval [CI] 29.9-55.0) whereas noncarriers had a risk for all types of cancer that was similar to that in the general population (SIR = 0.9; 95% CI 0.8-1.0). The calculated SIRs showed a >100-fold higher risk of sarcoma, female breast cancer, and hematologic malignancies for the p53 mutation carriers and agreed with the findings of an earlier segregation analysis based on the same cohort. These results quantitatively illustrated the spectrum of cancer risk in germline p53 mutation carriers and will provide valuable reference for the evaluation and treatment of patients with cancer.",2 4 3
"Characterization of mutations in the low density lipoprotein (LDL)-receptor gene in patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, and frequency of these mutations in FH patients in the United Kingdom. || Adolescent Adult Base Sequence Child Female Gene Deletion Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Point Mutation Receptors, LDL United Kingdom || Mutations in the gene for the low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor have been identified in 15 patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). Five patients are homozygous at the LDL-receptor locus; their mutant alleles include Glu387Lys and Pro664Leu in patients of Asian-Indian descent, Cys292Stop in a Greek Cypriot, Cys281Trp in a Turkish patient, and Gln 540Stop in a West Indian. The other 10 patients (9 of apparently British ancestry) are compound heterozygotes. Mutations have been identified in 18 of 20 possible alleles, including Glu80Lys (2 patients), Pro664Leu (3 patients), Asp69Gly, Cys176Arg, Cys227Tyr, Ser265Arg, Asp280Ala, Asp283Glu, Arg329Pro, Asp461Asn, Leu578Ser, a single bp deletion in exon 15, a 21 bp duplication of codons 200-206 and two large deletions. The seven mutations underlined above have not been described previously. The two uncharacterized mutant alleles fail to produce detectable amounts of mRNA. LDL-receptor activity in cultured cells from 13 of the 15 homozygous patients varied from undetectable to about 30% of normal, but there was no correlation between LDL-receptor activity and the untreated plasma cholesterol concentration in these patients. When genomic DNA from 295 patients with a clinical diagnosis of FH was screened for 29 mutations found in these and other FH patients of British ancestry, most were identified in only one or a few individuals. Four patients heterozygous for the Asp461Asn allele showed a wide range of clinical manifestations. These observations confirm the striking heterogeneity underlying FH in most populations and demonstrate the variability in phenotype between patients with the same mutation.",2 4 3
"Long-term follow-up of R403WMYH7 and R92WTNNT2 HCM families: mutations determine left ventricular dimensions but not wall thickness during disease progression. || Adolescent Adult Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child DNA Mutational Analysis Disease Progression Female Follow-Up Studies Genotype Heart Ventricles Humans Male Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Phenotype Troponin T Ultrasonography Ventricular Remodeling || The clinical profile and prognosis of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, a primary cardiac muscle disease caused mostly by mutations in sarcomeric protein-encoding genes, have been linked to particular disease-causing mutations in the past. However, such associations are often based on cross-sectional observations, as longitudinal studies of the progression of the disease in genotypically defined patients are sparse. Most importantly, the relative contribution of age, gender and genetic cause to disease profile and progression has not yet been reported, and the question remains whether one or more of these factors could mask the effect of the other(s). We previously described cross-sectional family studies of two hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)-causing mutations, R92W(TNNT2) and R403W(MYH7), both associated with minimal hypertrophy, but with widely different life expectancies. We re-investigated 22 and 26 R92W(TNNT2) and R403W(MYH7) mutation carriers in these and additional South African R92W(TNNT2) families after a mean 11.08 +/- 2.79 years, and compared the influence of the two mutations, in the context of age and gender, on disease progression. We demonstrated a positive correlation between age and interventricular septal thickness for both mutations, with more than a third of all mutation carriers developing clinically recognised hypertrophy only after the age of 35 years. This period of hypertrophically silent HCM also coincided with the years in which most sudden cardiac deaths occurred, particularly in male R92W(TNNT2) carriers. Statistical analyses indicated that the particular mutation was the strongest determinant of left ventricular remodelling; particularly, LVESD increased and EF reduction was noted in the majority of R403W(MYH7) carriers, which may require clinical follow-up over the longer term. Statistical modelling of follow-up data suggests that an interplay between unidentified, possibly gender-associated factors, and the causal mutation are the determinants of eventual cardiac function and survival, but not of the extent of hypertrophy, and emphasises the need for long-term follow-up even in individuals with apparently mild disease.",2
"Diagnostic dilemmas in Fabry disease: a case series study on GLA mutations of unknown clinical significance. || Adolescent Adult Aged Biopsy Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Fabry Disease Female Globosides Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Retrospective Studies Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease' (FD) phenotype is heterogeneous: alpha-galactosidase A gene mutations (GLA) can lead to classical or non-classical FD, or no FD. The aim of this study is to describe pitfalls in diagnosing non-classical FD and assess the diagnostic value of plasma globotriaosylsphingosine. This is a case series study. Family 1 (p.A143T) presented with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), absent classical FD signs, high residual alpha-galactosidase A activity (AGAL-A) and normal plasma globotriaosylsphingosine. Co-segregating sarcomeric mutations were found. Cardiac biopsy excluded FD. In family 2 (p.P60L), FD was suspected after kidney biopsy in a female with chloroquine use. Males had residual AGAL-A, no classical FD signs and minimally increased plasma globotriaosylsphingosine, indicating that p.P60L is most likely non-pathogenic. Non-specific complications and histology can be explained by chloroquine and alternative causes. Males of two unrelated families (p.R112H) show AGAL-A <5%, but slightly elevated plasma globotriaosylsphingosine (1.2-2.0 classical males >50 nmol/l). Histological evidence suggests a variable penetrance of this mutation. Patients with GLA mutations and non-specific findings such as HCM may have non-classical FD or no FD. Other (genetic) causes of FD-like findings should be excluded, including medication inducing FD-like storage. Plasma globotriaosylsphingosine may serve as a diagnostic tool, but histology of an affected organ is often mandatory.",2 4 0 3
"Improvement in the sensitivity of newborn screening for Fabry disease among females through the use of a high-throughput and cost-effective method, DNA mass spectrometry. || Adult DNA Fabry Disease Female Humans Infant, Newborn Mass Screening Mass Spectrometry Sensitivity and Specificity || Many female carriers of Fabry disease are likely to develop severe morbidity and mortality. However, by our own estimation, around 80% of female newborns are missed by our current enzyme-based screening approach. Our team's aim was to develop an improved cost-effective screening method that is able to detect Fabry disease among female newborns. In Taiwan, based on a database of 916,000 newborns, ~98% of Fabry patients carry mutations out of a pool of only 21 pathogenic mutations. An Agena iPLEX platform was designed to detect these 21 pathogenic mutations using only a single-assay panel. A total of 54,791 female infants were screened and 136 female newborns with the IVS4 + 919G > A mutation and one female newborn with the c.656T > C mutation were identified. Using the current enzyme-based newborn screening approach as baseline, around 83% of female newborns are being missed. Through a family study of the IVS4 female newborns, 30 IVS4 adult family members were found to have left ventricular hypertrophy. Ten patients received endomyocardial biopsy and all were found to have significant globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) accumulation in their cardiomyocytes. All of these individuals now receive enzyme replacement therapy. We have demonstrated that the Agena iPLEX assay is a powerful tool for detecting females with Fabry disease. Furthermore, through this screening, we also have been able to identify many disease-onset adult family members who were originally undiagnosed for Fabry disease. This screening helps them to receive treatment in time before severe and irreversible cardiac damage has occurred.",2
"Application of molecular genetics for diagnosing familial hypercholesterolemia in Norway: results from a family-based screening program. || Biomarkers Disease Management Family Health Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Lipids Molecular Biology Norway || A total of 119 different mutations in the low-density lipoprotein-receptor gene have so far been found to cause familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) among Norwegian patients. As of April 2003, 2390 patients from 959 unrelated families were provided with a molecular genetic diagnosis. Of these, 25.3% had xanthomas and 8.4% had xanthelasma. During the last 2-3 years, a systematic family-based program to identify close relatives of FH patients has been established. A total of 851 relatives of 188 index patients have undergone genetic testing. Four hundred seven people (47.9%) were affected, and 444 (52.1%) were unaffected. Only 41.5% of those affected were on lipid-lowering drugs, and only 6.1% had a value for total serum cholesterol below 193 mg/dL (5.0 mmol/L). A follow-up study was conducted in 146 of 407 affected relatives 6 months after genetic testing was performed. Of those already under treatment at the time of genetic testing, nonsignificant reductions of total serum cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol of 3.2% and 7.1% were observed. Of those not under treatment who were aged 18 years and older, the corresponding reductions were 21.2% (p <.0001) and 30.0% (p <.0001), respectively. We conclude that molecular genetic methods represent a feasible and highly efficient tool in a family-based strategy to diagnose FH.",2 4
"Clinical spectrum of obesity and mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor gene. || Adolescent Age of Onset Amino Acid Sequence Body Composition Child Energy Metabolism Female Genotype Growth Humans Hyperinsulinism Hyperphagia Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Obesity Pedigree Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Corticotropin || Melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) deficiency is the commonest monogenic form of obesity. However, the clinical spectrum and mode of inheritance have not been defined, pathophysiological mechanisms leading to obesity are poorly understood, and there is little information regarding genotype-phenotype correlations. We determined the nucleotide sequence of the MC4R gene in 500 probands with severe childhood obesity. Family studies were undertaken to examine cosegregation of identified mutations with obesity. Subjects with MC4R deficiency underwent metabolic and endocrine evaluation; the results were correlated with the signaling properties of mutant receptors. Twenty-nine probands (5.8 percent) had mutations in MC4R; 23 were heterozygous, and 6 were homozygous. Mutation carriers had severe obesity, increased lean mass, increased linear growth, hyperphagia, and severe hyperinsulinemia; homozygotes were more severely affected than heterozygotes. Subjects with mutations retaining residual signaling capacity had a less severe phenotype. Mutations in MC4R result in a distinct obesity syndrome that is inherited in a codominant manner. Mutations leading to complete loss of function are associated with a more severe phenotype. The correlation between the signaling properties of these mutant receptors and energy intake emphasizes the key role of this receptor in the control of eating behavior in humans.",2 4 0
"Missense mutation of the beta-cardiac myosin heavy-chain gene in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. ||  || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy occurs as an autosomal dominant familial disorder or as a sporadic disease without familial involvement. We describe a missense mutation of the beta-cardiac myosin heavy chain (MHC) gene, a G to T transversion (741 Gly-->Trp) identified by direct sequencing of exon 20 in four individuals affected with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Three individuals with sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, whose parents are clinically and genetically unaffected, had sequence variations of exon 34 of the alpha-cardiac MHC gene (a C to T transversion, 1658 Asp-->Asp, resulting in FokI site polymorphism), of intron 33 of the alpha-cardiac MHC gene (a G to A and an A to T transversion), and also of intron 14 of the beta-cardiac MHC gene (a C to T transversion in a patient with Noonan syndrome). Including our case, 30 missense mutations of the beta-cardiac MHC gene in 49 families have been reported thus far worldwide. Almost all are located in the region of the gene coding for the globular head of the molecule, and only one mutation was found in both Caucasian and Japanese families. Missense mutations of the beta-cardiac MHC gene in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may therefore differ according to race.",2 4
"Occurrence of acute lymphoblastic leukemia and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia in a patient with Noonan syndrome carrying the germline PTPN11 mutation p.E139D. || Comparative Genomic Hybridization Female Germ-Line Mutation Heterozygote Humans Infant Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Juvenile Noonan Syndrome Precursor Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 || Noonan syndrome (NS) is a common autosomal dominant condition characterized by short stature, congenital heart defects, and dysmorphic facial features caused in approximately 50% of cases by missense mutations in the PTPN11 gene. NS patients are predisposed to malignancies including myeloproliferative disorders or leukemias. We report a female NS patient carrying a PTPN11 germline mutation c.417 G > C (p.E139D), who developed in her second year of life an acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and after remission, she developed at 4 years of age a juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). Molecular genetic analysis of lymphoblastic blasts at the time of the ALL diagnosis revealed the germline mutation in a heterozygous state, while in the myelomonocytic blasts occurring with JMML diagnosis, the mutation p.E139D was found in a homozygous state due to a uniparental disomy (UPD). These findings lead to the suggestion that the pathogenesis of ALL and JMML in our patient is due to different mechanisms including somatically acquired secondary chromosomal abnormalities.",2 4
"Spectrum of mutations in PTPN11 and genotype-phenotype correlation in 96 patients with Noonan syndrome and five patients with cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome. || DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genotype Humans Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Male Noonan Syndrome Phenotype Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Sequence Analysis, DNA || Noonan syndrome (NS) is a relatively common, but genetically heterogeneous autosomal dominant malformation syndrome. Characteristic features are proportionate short stature, dysmorphic face, and congenital heart defects. Only recently, a gene involved in NS could be identified. It encodes the non-receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, which is an important molecule in several intracellular signal transduction pathways that control diverse developmental processes, most importantly cardiac semilunar valvulogenesis. We have screened this gene for mutations in 96 familial and sporadic, well-characterised NS patients and identified 15 different missense mutations in a total of 32 patients (33%), including 23 index patients. Most changes clustered in one exon which encodes parts of the N-SH2 domain. Five of the mutations were recurrent. Interestingly, no mutations in the PTPN11 gene were detected in five additional patients with cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome, which shows clinical similarities to NS.",2 4
"Germline TP53 mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation-negative French Canadian breast cancer families. || Adult Age of Onset BRCA1 Protein BRCA2 Protein Breast Neoplasms Canada DNA Mutational Analysis European Continental Ancestry Group Female Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Middle Aged Neoplasms Pedigree Polymerase Chain Reaction || About 40% of French Canadian breast and/or ovarian cancer families harbor germline BRCA1 or BRCA1 mutations where common mutations account for about 84% of all mutations identified in cancer families. Within a series of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation-negative families, a germline TP53 13398 G>A (Arg213Gln) mutation was identified, which was selected for mutation analysis in this gene because of a family history consistent with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). Given the founder effects in this population, the 13398 G>A mutation was screened in series of 52 BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation-negative cancer families, and a mutation-positive family was identified. However, pedigree inspection and expansion of mutation-positive families with the same mutation revealed that they were closely related to each other. To further characterize the contribution of TP53 in cancer families, mutation analysis was performed in the remaining BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation-negative cancer families. Thirty sequence variants were identified, the majority of which occur in intronic sequences and are not predicted to affect the functionality of TP53. However, the 14538 G>A (Arg290His) mutation was identified in a family which did not exhibit features consistent with LFS or Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) syndrome. Neither of the TP53 mutations was detected in 381 French Canadian women with breast cancer diagnosed before 50 years of age not selected for family history of cancer. In all, germline TP53 mutations were identified in two of 52 (3.8%) cancer families, suggesting that TP53 is not a major contributor to BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation-negative breast and/or ovarian cancer families of French Canadian descent.",2
"Germline mutations of TP53 and BRCA2 genes in breast cancer/sarcoma families. || Breast Neoplasms Female Genes, BRCA1 Genes, BRCA2 Genes, p53 Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Mutation, Missense Pedigree Polymerase Chain Reaction Sarcoma || The genetic aetiology of familial aggregations of breast cancer and sarcomas has been elucidated only in part. In this study, 23 unrelated individuals from families with one case of sarcoma and at least one case of breast cancer were screened for mutations in the TP53, BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Families were classified according to their conformity to the criteria defining the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) syndrome and hereditary breast/ovarian cancer (HBOC). Germline TP53 mutations were identified in three instances (13%), including one LFS and two LFL families, while none of the non-LFS/non-LFL families had a TP53 mutation. Three cases (13%), including one with a TP53 mutation, carried BRCA2 mutations. Of these, two were observed in LFL/HBOC families and the other one in a non-LFS/non-LFL/HBOC family, while none of the non-HBOC families tested positive. These findings suggest that the screening of BRCA2, in addition to TP53, may be appropriate for the molecular characterisation of breast cancer/sarcoma families, with practical implications for counselling and clinical management.",2
"Expressivity of hearing loss in cases with Usher syndrome type IIA. ||  || The purpose of this study was to compare the genotype/phenotype relationship between siblings with identical USH2A pathologic mutations and the consequent audiologic phenotypes, in particular degree of hearing loss (HL). Decade audiograms were also compared among two groups of affected subjects with different mutations of USH2A. DNA samples from patients with Usher syndrome type II were analysed. The audiological features of patients and affected siblings with USH2A mutations were also examined to identify genotype-phenotype correlations. Genetic and audiometric examinations were performed in 18 subjects from nine families with Usher syndrome type IIA. Three different USH2A mutations were identified in the affected subjects. Both similarities and differences of the auditory phenotype were seen in families with several affected siblings. A variable degree of hearing loss, ranging from mild to profound, was observed among affected subjects. No significant differences in hearing thresholds were found the group of affected subjects with different pathological mutations. Our results indicate that mutations in the USH2A gene and the resulting phenotype are probably modulated by other variables, such as modifying genes, epigenetics or environmental factors which may be of importance for better understanding the etiology of Usher syndrome.",2 1 3
"Cardiovascular risk assessment of dyslipidemic children: analysis of biomarkers to identify monogenic dyslipidemia. || Adolescent Biomarkers Cardiovascular Diseases Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Environment Female Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Lipoproteins Male Risk Assessment Risk Factors || The distinction between a monogenic dyslipidemia and a polygenic/environmental dyslipidemia is important for the cardiovascular risk assessment, counseling, and treatment of these patients. The present work aims to perform the cardiovascular risk assessment of dyslipidemic children to identify useful biomarkers for clinical criteria improvement in clinical settings. Main cardiovascular risk factors were analyzed in a cohort of 237 unrelated children with clinical diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). About 40% carried at least two cardiovascular risk factors and 37.6% had FH, presenting mutations in LDLR and APOB. FH children showed significant elevated atherogenic markers and lower concentration of antiatherogenic particles. Children without a molecular diagnosis of FH had higher levels of TGs, apoC2, apoC3, and higher frequency of BMI and overweight/obesity, suggesting that environmental factors can be the underlying cause of their hypercholesterolem≥ia. An apoB/apoA1 ratio ≥0.68 was identified as the best biomarker (area under the curve = 0.835) to differentiate FH from other dyslipidemias. The inclusion in clinical criteria of a higher cut-off point for LDL cholesterol or an apoB/apoA1 ratio ≥0.68 optimized the criteria sensitivity and specificity. The correct identification, at an early age, of all children at-risk is of great importance so that specific interventions can be implemented. apoB/apoA1 can improve the identification of FH patients.",2 4
"Functional and biological studies of α-galactosidase A variants with uncertain significance from newborn screening in Taiwan. || Biological Assay Biomarkers Blood Specimen Collection Dried Blood Spot Testing Fabry Disease Female Humans Infant, Newborn Male Mutation Neonatal Screening Taiwan alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is an X-linked disorder resulted from deficiency of α-galactosidase A (GLA) activity. In Taiwan, a total of 792,247 newborns were screened from 2008 to 2014 in two newborn screening centers, and 13 variants of uncertain significance (VOUS) in the GLA gene were identified. To determine whether these variants were pathogenic or not, functional, biochemical, clinical and pedigree analyses were performed. In vitro functional assay was established through site-directed mutagenesis, and four in silico tools were used to predict pathogenesis. The enzyme activity of dried blood spots and plasma metabolite lyso-Gb3 level from subjects with the variants were measured. Additionally, clinical manifestations were evaluated extensively from the subjects and their relatives. Our results revealed that p.G104V, p.I232T, p.D322H, and p.G360C all exhibited relatively low residual enzyme activities and elevated plasma lyso-Gb3 level. These data strongly suggest that these Fabry mutations may cause classical or later-onset phenotypes. In contrast, neither significantly clinical symptoms nor elevated lyso-Gb3 level was found in cases with p.P60S, p.A108T, p.S304T, p.R356Q, and p.P362T variants, which may be non-pathogenic or milder forms of Fabry variants. More data need to be included for the patients with p.N53D, p.P210S, p.M296L, and p.K391T variants. The established system provides us more information to classify these GLA variants.",2 4 0
"Cortical dysplasia associated with the PTEN mutation in Bannayan Riley Ruvalcaba syndrome: a rare finding. || Adult Amino Acid Substitution Brain Exons Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Infant Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Malformations of Cortical Development Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase || ",2 3
"Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in MODY and early-onset NIDDM: evidence for a mutational hotspot in exon 4. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Amino Acid Sequence Animals Base Sequence Child Child, Preschool Codon DNA-Binding Proteins Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Exons Female Frameshift Mutation Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta Humans Male Mice Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Nuclear Family Nuclear Proteins Pedigree Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic Promoter Regions, Genetic Rats Sequence Deletion Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid Transcription Factors || We have recently shown that mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha are the cause of one form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3). Here, we report the exon-intron organization and partial sequence of the human HNF-1alpha gene. In addition, we have screened the ten exons and flanking introns of this gene for mutations in a group of 25 unrelated white subjects from Germany who presented with NIDDM before 35 years of age and had a first-degree relative with NIDDM. Mutations were identified in nine of these individuals, suggesting that mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene are a common cause of diabetes in German subjects with early-onset NIDDM and a family history of diabetes. Thus, screening for mutations in this gene may be indicated in subjects with early-onset NIDDM. Interestingly, three of the nine mutations occurred at the same site in exon 4 with insertion of a C in a polyC tract, centered around codon 290 (designated Pro291fsinsC), thereby resulting in a frameshift during translation and premature termination. Analyses of linked DNA polymorphisms in the HNF-1alpha gene indicated that the Pro291fsinsC mutation was present on a different haplotype in each subject, implying that the polyC tract represents a mutational hot spot. We have also identified the mutation in the HNF-1alpha gene in the Jutland pedigree, one of the original MODY pedigrees reported in the literature, as being a T-->G substitution in codon 241, resulting in the replacement of a conserved Cys by Gly (C241G). The information on the sequence of the HNF-1alpha gene and its promoter region will facilitate the search for mutations in other subjects and studies of the role of the gene in determining normal beta-cell functions.",2
"Recurrent somatic JAK-STAT pathway variants within a RUNX1-mutated pedigree. || Adult Child Codon, Nonsense Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit Female Germ-Line Mutation Humans Janus Kinase 2 Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Acute Male Pedigree Proteins Signal Transduction || Germline variants within the transcription factor RUNX1 are associated with familial platelet disorder and acute leukemia in over 40% of carriers. At present, the somatic events triggering leukemic transformation appear heterogeneous and profiles of leukemia initiation across family members are poorly defined. We report a new RUNX1 family where three sisters harboring a germline nonsense RUNX1 variant, c.601C>T (p.(Arg201*)), developed acute myelomonocytic leukemia (AML) at 5 years of age. Whole-exome sequencing of tumor samples revealed all three siblings independently acquired variants within the JAK-STAT pathway, specifically targeting JAK2 and SH2B3 (a negative regulator of JAK2), while also sharing the 46/1 haplotype linked with sporadic JAK2-positive myeloproliferative neoplasms. In-depth chromosomal characterization of tumors revealed acquired copy number gains and uniparental disomy amplifying RUNX1, JAK2 and SH2B3 variants, highlighting the significance of co-operation between these disrupted pathways. One sibling, presenting with myelodysplasia at 14 years, had no evidence of clonal or subclonal JAK2 or SH2B3 variants, suggesting the latter were specifically associated with leukemic transformation in her sisters. Collectively, the clinical and molecular homogeneity across these three young siblings provides the first notable example of convergent AML evolution in a RUNX1 pedigree, with the recurrent acquisition of JAK-STAT pathway variants giving rise to high-risk AML, characterized by chemotherapy resistance and relapse.",2 4
"A myosin missense mutation, not a null allele, causes familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. ||  || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterized by myocardial hypertrophy of unknown etiology. Missense mutations of the cardiac beta-myosin-heavy-chain (beta-MHC) gene that may be responsible for cardiac hypertrophy have been detected in patients with HCM. On the other hand, gross structural abnormalities in the cardiac beta-MHC gene, ie, an alpha/beta hybrid gene and partial deletion of the gene, have also been reported. The direct correlation between gross abnormalities and development of HCM is not well understood. We analyzed the structure of the cardiac beta-MHC gene from patients with HCM by using polymerase chain reaction-DNA conformation polymorphism analysis and found two sequence variations in exons 3 and 22 in one patient. These sequence variations at codon 54 (exon 3; nonsense mutation) and codon 870 (exon 22; Arg-to-His mutation) were identified by direct sequencing and dot-blot hybridization with allele-specific oligonucleotide probes. Relatives of this patient were examined for the mutations. It was revealed that the missense mutation was inherited from the affected father and the nonsense mutation from the unaffected grandmother through the unaffected mother. In addition, the missense mutation was also found in seven other patients from two other unrelated multiplex HCM families. The Arg870His mutation was suggested to cause HCM. In contrast, the gene with the nonsense mutation would encode for a cardiac beta-MHC protein of only 53 amino acid residues, which may be too short to be incorporated into the thick filament assembly of cardiac myosin chains and showed no dominant phenotype of heart disease. This is the first report of a nonsense mutation in the human cardiac beta-MHC gene.",2 4
"Biochemical characterization of mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase enzymes and correlation with clinical presentation in hyperphenylalaninaemic patients. ||  || The biochemical properties of mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) enzymes and clinical characteristics of hyperphenylalaninaemic patients who bear these mutant enzymes were investigated. Biochemical characterization of mutant PAH enzymes p.D143G, p.R155H, p.L348V, p.R408W and p.P416Q included determination of specific activity, substrate activation, V(max), K(m) for (6R)-L-erythro-5,6,7,8-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)), K (d) for BH(4), and protein stabilization by BH(4). Clinical data from 22 patients either homozygous, functionally hemizygous, or compound heterozygous for the mutant enzymes of interest were correlated with biochemical parameters of the mutant enzymes. The p.L348V and p.P416Q enzymes retain significant catalytic activity yet were observed in classic and moderate PKU patients. Biochemical studies demonstrated that BH(4) rectified the stability defects in p.L348V and p.P416Q; additionally, patients with these variants responded to BH(4) therapy. The p.R155H mutant displayed low PAH activity and decreased apparent affinity for L-Phe yet was observed in mild hyperphenylalaninaemia. The p.R155H mutant does not display kinetic instability, as it is stabilized by BH(4) similarly to wild-type PAH; thus the residual activity is available under physiological conditions. The p.R408W enzyme is dysfunctional in nearly all biochemical parameters, as evidenced by disease severity in homozygous and hemizygous patients. Biochemical assessment of mutant PAH proteins, especially parameters involving interaction with BH(4) that impact protein folding, appear useful in clinical correlation. As additional patients and mutant proteins are assessed, the utility of this approach will become apparent.",2 1
"[Malignant hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by the Arg723Gly mutation in beta-myosin heavy chain gene in a Chinese pedigree]. ||  || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous disease and an Arg723Gly mutation in beta-myosin heavy chain (beta-MHC) gene was found in 3 Spanish families with malignant HCM. We detected this gene mutation in 5 Chinese pedigrees with hypertensive cardiomyopathy. Five Chinese pedigrees with HCM and 80 age-matched normal control subjects were chosen for the study. The exons in the functional regions of the beta-MHC gene were amplified with PCR and the products were sequenced, genotype and phenotype analyzed. Arg723Gly mutation was identified in exon 20 in one pedigree. In this pedigree, 13 out of 25 family members were diagnosed as HCM, 5 died of heart failure, all HCM patients in this pedigree had Arg723Gly mutation and 3 of them had NYHA III and 2 of them were diagnosed as HCM before the age of 20. Arg723Gly mutation was also one of the main disease-causing genes in Chinese familial HCM. The mutation of Arg723Gly is a malignant phenotype as shown by early progressive heart failure development and poor prognosis in this pedigree with Arg723Gly mutation.",2
