Abstract,Classification
"Missense mutations in the PCSK9 gene are associated with hypocholesterolemia and possibly increased response to statin therapy. || Adult Alleles Cholesterol, LDL Dyslipidemias Female Haplotypes Humans Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Reductase Inhibitors Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Receptors, LDL Serine Endopeptidases || The proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) gene encodes a proprotein convertase that causes degradation of cell surface low-density lipoprotein receptors (LDLRs). Mutations in the PCSK9 gene that disrupt the normal function of PCSK9 could therefore result in increased number of LDLRs and hypocholesterolemia. Also, the cholesterol-lowering effect of statins could be increased in subjects carrying mutations in the PCSK9 gene. We have screened 38 unrelated hypocholesterolemic subjects as well as 25 unrelated familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) heterozygotes who responded particularly well to statin therapy for mutations in the 12 exons of the PCSK9 gene by DNA sequencing. Six of the 38 (15.8%) hypocholesterolemic subjects were heterozygous for 1 of the 3 mutations R46L, G106R, or R237W in the PCSK9 gene. In the group of 25 FH heterozygotes who responded particularly well to statin therapy, 3 (8.8%) were heterozygous for mutations R46L or N157K in the PCSK9 gene. None of 441 hypercholesterolemic subjects without mutations in the LDLR gene or in the apolipoprotein B-100 gene possessed any of the 4 mutations. The 4 missense mutations R46L, G106R, N157K, and R237W are associated with hypocholesterolemia and possibly increased response to statin therapy.",2 4
"Mutation in BAG3 causes severe dominant childhood muscular dystrophy. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adolescent Animals Apoptosis Regulatory Proteins COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops Child Crystallins DNA Mutational Analysis Female Humans In Situ Nick-End Labeling Male Microscopy, Electron, Transmission Muscle Fibers, Skeletal Muscle Proteins Muscular Dystrophies Mutation Transfection || Myofibrillar myopathies (MFMs) are morphologically distinct but genetically heterogeneous muscular dystrophies in which disintegration of Z disks and then of myofibrils is followed by ectopic accumulation of multiple proteins. Cardiomyopathy, neuropathy, and dominant inheritance are frequent associated features. Mutations in alphaB-crystallin, desmin, myotilin, Zasp, or filamin-C can cause MFMs and were detected in 32 of 85 patients of the Mayo MFM cohort. Bag3, another Z-disk-associated protein, has antiapoptotic properties, and its targeted deletion in mice causes fulminant myopathy with early lethality. We therefore searched for mutations in BAG3 in 53 unrelated MFM patients. We searched for mutations in BAG3 by direct sequencing. We analyzed structural changes in muscle by histochemistry, immunocytochemistry, and electron microscopy, examined mobility of the mutant Bag3 by nondenaturing electrophoresis, and searched for abnormal aggregation of the mutant protein in COS-7 (SV-40 transformed monkey kidney fibroblast-7) cells. We identified a heterozygous p.Pro209Leu mutation in three patients. All presented in childhood, had progressive limb and axial muscle weakness, and experienced development of cardiomyopathy and severe respiratory insufficiency in their teens; two had rigid spines, and one a peripheral neuropathy. Electron microscopy showed disintegration of Z disks, extensive accumulation of granular debris and larger inclusions, and apoptosis of 8% of the nuclei. On nondenaturing electrophoresis of muscle extracts, the Bag3 complex migrated faster in patient than control extracts, and expression of FLAG-labeled mutant and wild-type Bag3 in COS cells showed abnormal aggregation of the mutant protein. We conclude mutation in Bag3 defines a novel severe autosomal dominant childhood muscular dystrophy.",4
"Prevalence of melanocortin-4 receptor deficiency in Europeans and their age-dependent penetrance in multigenerational pedigrees. || Adolescent Adult Age Distribution Child European Continental Ancestry Group Feeding Behavior Female Humans Hyperphagia Male Middle Aged Mutation Obesity Pedigree Penetrance Phenotype Prevalence Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 || Melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) deficiency is the most frequent genetic cause of obesity. However, there is uncertainty regarding the degree of penetrance of this condition, and the putative impact of the environment on the development of obesity in MC4R mutation carriers is unknown. We determined the MC4R sequence in 2,257 obese individuals and 2,677 nonobese control subjects of European origin and established the likely functional impact of all variants detected. We then included relatives of probands carriers and studied 25 pedigrees, including 97 carriers and 94 noncarriers from three generations. Of the MC4R nonsynonymous mutations found in obese subjects, 68% resulted in a loss of function in vitro. They were found in 1.72% of obese versus 0.15% of nonobesed subjects (P = 6.9 x 10(-10)). Among the families, abnormal eating behavior was more frequent in both MC4R-deficient children and adults than in noncarriers. Although BMI was inversely associated with educational status in noncarrier adults, no such relationship was seen in MC4R mutation carriers. We observed a generational effect, with a penetrance of 40% in MC4R-deficient adults aged >52 years, 60% in 18- to 52-year-old adults, and 79% in children. The longitudinal study of adult carriers showed an increasing age-dependent penetrance (37% at 20 years versus 60% at >40 years). We have established a robust estimate of age-related penetrance for MC4R deficiency and demonstrated a generational effect on penetrance, which may relate to the development of an ""obesogenic"" environment. It remains to be seen whether appropriate manipulation of environmental factors may contribute to preventing the development of obesity even in those strongly genetically predisposed to it.",4
"The LDL receptor locus in familial hypercholesterolemia: mutational analysis of a membrane protein. || Animals DNA Mutational Analysis Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Multigene Family Mutation Receptors, LDL || ",4 0
"The use of next-generation sequencing in clinical diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia. || Adolescent Adult Aged Child Child, Preschool DNA Copy Number Variations High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Middle Aged Molecular Diagnostic Techniques Mutation Rate Prospective Studies Reproducibility of Results Sensitivity and Specificity Sequence Analysis, DNA Young Adult || Familial hypercholesterolemia is a common Mendelian disorder associated with early-onset coronary heart disease that can be treated by cholesterol-lowering drugs. The majority of cases in the United Kingdom are currently without a molecular diagnosis, which is partly due to the cost and time associated with standard screening techniques. The main purpose of this study was to test the sensitivity and specificity of two next-generation sequencing protocols for genetic diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia. Libraries were prepared for next-generation sequencing by two target enrichment protocols; one using the SureSelect Target Enrichment System and the other using the PCR-based Access Array platform. In the validation cohort, both protocols showed 100% specificity, whereas the sensitivity for short variant detection was 100% for the SureSelect Target Enrichment and 98% for the Access Array protocol. Large deletions/duplications were only detected using the SureSelect Target Enrichment protocol. In the prospective cohort, the mutation detection rate using the Access Array was highest in patients with clinically definite familial hypercholesterolemia (67%), followed by patients with possible familial hypercholesterolemia (26%). We have shown the potential of target enrichment methods combined with next-generation sequencing for molecular diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia. Adopting these assays for patients with suspected familial hypercholesterolemia could improve cost-effectiveness and increase the overall number of patients with a molecular diagnosis.",4
"Novel mutations in GCK and HNF1A genes in Italian families with MODY phenotype. || Adolescent Adult Alternative Splicing Child Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Frameshift Mutation Glucokinase Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Humans Italy Male Middle Aged Mutagenesis, Insertional Mutation, Missense Phenotype Young Adult || Analysis of GCK and HNF1A genes in 32 MODY families identified three novel mutations: the missense mutation G170D and the deletion/insertion P432Xfs in GCK and the splicing mutation IVS4nt-1G>T, in HNF1A. For IVS4nt-1G>T the sequence analysis of RT-PCR products demonstrated exon skipping with the use of a cryptic splicing site.",4
"Lack of autofluorescence in fundus albipunctatus associated with mutations in RDH5. || Adult Alcohol Oxidoreductases Carrier Proteins Child Electroretinography Female Fluorescein Angiography Fluorescence Fundus Oculi Humans Lipofuscin Male Microarray Analysis Mutation Photic Stimulation Retinal Degeneration Tomography, Optical Coherence Visual Field Tests Young Adult || The purpose of this study was to characterize the phenotype of fundus albipunctatus associated with RDH5 mutations. Four unrelated patients (patients 1-4) aged 35, 32, 19, and 8 years were examined with full-field electroretinography, multifocal electroretinography, optical coherence tomography, and fundus autofluorescence photography. Molecular genetic investigations included sequencing of RDH5 and RLBP1. Patients 1 to 3 harbored homozygous mutations (c.881G>C, c.625C>T, and c.382G>A, respectively) and patient 4 harbored the compound heterozygous mutations (c.95delT and c.712G>T) in RDH5. A large variability in retinal dysfunction caused by RDH5 mutations was found but not fully explained by a simple prediction of reduced enzymatic function. All patients showed lack of autofluorescence of the fundus, indicating a reduced supply of 11-cis retinal to the photoreceptors. The lesions corresponding to the white dots did not autofluoresce and were seen on optical coherence tomography as discrete hyperreflective elements in the outer retina extending from the external limiting membrane to Bruch membrane. Mutations in RDH5 associated with fundus albipunctatus seem to prevent normal lipofuscin accumulation. A relatively good functional status of 2 of 3 adult patients indicates that interference with 11-cis retinol dehydrogenase function may be a promising strategy for therapeutic intervention in retinal disorders featuring excessive lipofuscin accumulation.",4
"A clinical and genetic analysis of multiple primary cancer referrals to genetics services. || DNA Mismatch Repair Exons Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Neoplasms, Multiple Primary PTEN Phosphohydrolase Referral and Consultation Sequence Analysis, DNA Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Multiple primary malignant tumours (MPMT) are frequently taken as an indicator of potential inherited cancer susceptibility and occur at appreciable frequency both among unselected cancer patients and, particularly, among referrals to cancer genetics services. However, there is a paucity of information on the clinical genetic evaluation of cohorts of MPMT patients representing a variety of tumour types. We ascertained a referral-based series of MPMT cases and describe the patterns of tumours observed. Service-based molecular genetic testing had demonstrated a pathogenic germline variant in an inherited cancer gene in fewer than one in four unselected referrals. To assess for evidence of thus far unidentified variants in those who tested negative, comparisons were made with those who tested positive. This revealed considerable overlap between the two groups with respect to clinical characteristics indicative of an inherited cancer syndrome. We therefore proceeded to test a subset of unexplained MPMT cases (n=62) for pathogenic germline variants in TP53 and PTEN but none were detected. Individuals with MPMT may receive negative genetic test results for a number of reasons, which are discussed. Many of these may be addressed by the increasing application of next generation sequencing techniques such as inherited cancer gene panels.",4
"Prevalence and Clinical Implication of Double Mutations in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy: Revisiting the Gene-Dose Effect. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Female Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Prevalence || Available data suggests that double mutations in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are not rare and are associated with a more severe phenotype. Most of this data, however, is based on noncontemporary variant classification. Clinical data of all hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients with 2 rare genetic variants were retrospectively reviewed and compared with a group of patients with a single disease-causing variant. Furthermore, a literature search was performed for all studies with information on prevalence and outcome of patients with double mutations. Classification of genetic variants was reanalyzed according to current guidelines. In our cohort (n=1411), 9% of gene-positive patients had 2 rare variants in sarcomeric genes but only in 1 case (0.4%) were both variants classified as pathogenic. Patients with 2 rare variants had a trend toward younger age at presentation when compared with patients with a single mutation. All other clinical variables were similar. In data pooled from cohort studies in the literature, 8% of gene-positive patients were published to have double mutations. However, after reanalysis of reported variants, this prevalence diminished to 0.4%. All patients with 2 radical mutations in MYBPC3 in the literature had severe disease with death or heart transplant during the first year of life. Data on other specific genotype-phenotype correlations were scarce. Double mutations in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are much less common than previously estimated. With the exception of double radical MYBPC3 mutations, there is little data to guide clinical decision making in cases with double mutations.",4
"Functional characterisation of alpha-galactosidase a mutations as a basis for a new classification system in fabry disease. ||  || Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked hereditary defect of glycosphingolipid storage caused by mutations in the gene encoding the lysosomal hydrolase α-galactosidase A (GLA, α-gal A). To date, over 400 mutations causing amino acid substitutions have been described. Most of these mutations are related to the classical Fabry phenotype. Generally in lysosomal storage disorders a reliable genotype/phenotype correlation is difficult to achieve, especially in FD with its X-linked mode of inheritance. In order to predict the metabolic consequence of a given mutation, we combined in vitro enzyme activity with in vivo biomarker data. Furthermore, we used the pharmacological chaperone (PC) 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin (DGJ) as a tool to analyse the influence of individual mutations on subcellular organelle-trafficking and stability. We analysed a significant number of mutations and correlated the obtained properties to the clinical manifestation related to the mutation in order to improve our knowledge of the identity of functional relevant amino acids. Additionally, we illustrate the consequences of different mutations on plasma lyso-globotriaosylsphingosine (lyso-Gb3) accumulation in the patients' plasma, a biomarker proven to reflect the impaired substrate clearance caused by specific mutations. The established system enables us to provide information for the clinical relevance of PC therapy for a given mutant. Finally, in order to generate reliable predictions of mutant GLA defects we compared the different data sets to reveal the most coherent system to reflect the clinical situation.",3 4 0
"Intracranial arterial abnormalities in patients with late onset Pompe disease (LOPD). ||  || Pompe disease is a rare metabolic disorder due to lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (GAA) deficiency. It is considered as a multi-systemic disease since, although glycogen accumulation is largely prominent in heart, skeletal and respiratory muscles, other organs can also be affected. As regards the vascular system, few reports have documented cerebrovascular malformations in Pompe patients. The aim of this study was to define the presence and type of intracranial arterial abnormalities in a cohort of late onset Pompe disease (LOPD) patients. We have studied 21 LOPD patients with cerebral CT angiography (CTA), using maximum intensity projection and volume rendering technique for 3D-image reconstruction. We found intracranial arterial abnormalities in 13/21 patients (62 %), of whom: 2/21 patients (9.5 %) showed an unruptured intracranial aneurysm (respectively 2 and 4 mm), 10/21 (47 %) had a vertebrobasilar dolichoectasia (VBD) and 1/21 a basilar artery fenestration. Signs of lacunar encephalopathy (insular, capsular and frontal subcortical lesions) were detected in 13/21 patients (62 %) and this correlated with the presence of respiratory impairment (p = 0.017). These findings differ from what has been previously observed in healthy, aged-matched populations and confirm that cerebral arteries abnormalities, mainly involving the posterior circle, are not so rare in LOPD patients and are often accompanied by a lacunar encephalopathy that might represent a hypoxic-ischemic origin. A CTA or an MRA is recommended, in LOPD patients, for early detection of cerebrovascular malformations as they could lead to life-threatening events such as sub-arachnoid haemorrhage or brainstem compression.",4
"Melanocortin 4 receptor mutations in obese Czech children: studies of prevalence, phenotype development, weight reduction response, and functional analysis. || Adolescent Adult Body Height Body Weight Case-Control Studies Child Child, Preschool Czech Republic DNA Mutational Analysis Female Follow-Up Studies Gene Frequency Humans Male Models, Biological Mutation Obesity Pedigree Phenotype Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Weight Loss || Mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor gene (MC4R) represent the most common known cause of monogenic human obesity. The aims of this study were the following: 1) to estimate the prevalence of MC4R mutations in obese Czech children; 2) to evaluate phenotypic features of the mutation carriers; 3) to compare weight, height, and body mass index of MC4R mutation carriers with noncarriers in longitudinal studies; 4) to determine the effect of a weight management program among MC4R mutation carriers; and 5) to perform a functional analysis of a novel variant. We analyzed the coding region of MC4R in a cohort of 289 Czech children and adolescents with early-onset obesity by direct sequencing. Information on weight, height, body mass index, baseline biochemical data, and a weight loss follow-up study was obtained. In vitro functional analysis of one novel variant was performed. We identified six different mutations in seven probands: one novel missense mutation Cys84Arg and five previously reported variants, Arg7Cys, Ser19fsdelA, Phe51Leu, Ser127Leu, and Gly181Asp. The Gly181Asp variant was detected in one homozygous carrier from unrelated parents. None of the mutation carriers fulfilled the MC4R syndrome criteria. A comparison of anthropometrics in mutation carriers and noncarriers during 13 yr of follow-up did not reveal any significant differences. MC4R mutation carriers exhibited a similar ability to lose weight as obese noncarriers. The novel variant Cys84Arg showed a significant reduction in cAMP signal properties of the MC4R. Among obese Czech children, we found a prevalence of 2.4% of MC4R homozygous and heterozygous mutations and showed a similar response to diet management of MC4R mutation carriers and noncarriers.",4
"Transcriptional response to GAA deficiency (Pompe disease) in infantile-onset patients. || Age of Onset Child Child, Preschool Female Gene Expression Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Muscle, Skeletal Phenotype Transcription, Genetic alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is a genetic disorder resulting from a deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) that manifests as a clinical spectrum with regard to symptom severity and rate of progression. In this study, we used microarrays to examine gene expression from the muscle of two cohorts of infantile-onset Pompe patients to identify transcriptional differences that may contribute to the disease phenotype. We found strong similarities among the gene expression profiles generated from biceps and quadriceps, and identified a number of signaling pathways altered in both cohorts. We also found that infantile-onset Pompe patient muscle had a gene expression pattern characteristic of immature or regenerating muscle, and exhibited many transcriptional markers of inflammation, despite having few overt signs of inflammatory infiltrate. Further, we identified genes exhibiting correlation between expression at baseline and response to therapy. This combined dataset can serve as a foundation for biological discovery and biomarker development to improve the treatment of Pompe disease.",1 4
"Noonan syndrome caused by germline KRAS mutation in Taiwan: report of two patients and a review of the literature. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Child Child, Preschool Female Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Noonan Syndrome Pedigree Proto-Oncogene Proteins Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras) Taiwan ras Proteins || Noonan syndrome is a highly variable disorder that has significant phenotypic overlap with Costello syndrome and cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome. KRAS mutation was the second reported gene for Noonan syndrome. This study screened for mutation of the KRAS gene in 57 unrelated ethnic Chinese children suffering from Noonan syndrome without PTPN11 gene mutation in Taiwan. This work only identified two patients with different missense mutations (c.40G>A, p.Val14Ile; c.108A>G, p.Ile36Met) in the exon 1 of KRAS gene. This study also analyzed the characteristics of 34 reported cases involving KRAS mutations in the literature. All these patients presented with variable phenotypes, including Noonan syndrome (n = 19), cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (n = 7), Costello syndrome (n = 6), and Noonan/cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (n = 1). The phenotype of KRAS mutations was generally severe, including short stature, mental retardation, heart defects, etc. In conclusion, this investigation demonstrates that KRAS mutations are the cause in a minority of cases of Chinese patients with Noonan syndrome in Taiwan.",4
"Extreme cerebrospinal fluid amyloid beta levels identify family with late-onset Alzheimer's disease presenilin 1 mutation. || Age of Onset Aged Aged, 80 and over Alzheimer Disease Amyloid beta-Peptides Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay Female Genotype Humans Linear Models Male Middle Aged Mutation Neuropsychological Tests Plasmids Presenilin-1 Risk Factors Sex Characteristics Transfection || Aggregation and deposition of amyloid beta (Abeta) in the brain is thought to be central to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Recent studies suggest that cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Abeta levels are strongly correlated with AD status and progression, and may be a meaningful endophenotype for AD. Mutations in presenilin 1 (PSEN1) are known to cause AD and change Abeta levels. In this study, we have investigated DNA sequence variation in the presenilin (PSEN1) gene using CSF Abeta levels as an endophenotype for AD. We sequenced the exons and flanking intronic regions of PSEN1 in clinically characterized research subjects with extreme values of CSF Abeta levels. This novel approach led directly to the identification of a disease-causing mutation in a family with late-onset AD. This finding suggests that CSF Abeta may be a useful endophenotype for genetic studies of AD. Our results also suggest that PSEN1 mutations can cause AD with a large range in age of onset, spanning both early- and late-onset AD.",4
"Molecular genetics of the LDL receptor gene in familial hypercholesterolemia. ||  || The low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor is a cell surface transmembrane protein that mediates the uptake and lysosomal degradation of plasma LDL, thereby providing cholesterol to cells. Mutations disrupting the function of this receptor produce autosomal dominant familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). Affected individuals have elevated plasma levels of LDL, which causes premature coronary atherosclerosis. To date, 71 mutations in the LDL receptor gene have been characterized at a molecular level. In this report, we describe 79 additional mutations and review the insights that all 150 mutations have provided into the structure/function relationship of the receptor protein and the clinical manifestations of FH.",3 4 0
"Fabry disease: 45 novel mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A gene causing the classical phenotype. || Fabry Disease Female Genetic Diseases, X-Linked Humans Leukocytes Male Mutation Sequence Deletion alpha-Galactosidase || The nature of the molecular lesions in the alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A) gene causing Fabry disease was determined in 50 unrelated families with the classic phenotype of this X-linked recessive lysosomal storage disease. Genomic DNA was isolated from affected males or obligate carrier females, and the entire alpha-Gal A coding region as well as the flanking and intronic sequences were analyzed by PCR amplification and automated sequencing. Forty-five new mutations were identified including 38 single base substitutions (32 missense and four nonsense) and nine gene rearrangements: MIR, M42T, G43D, G43V, H46Y, F50C, L68F, G132R, T141I, Y152X, K168R, G183S, V199M, P205R, Y207S, Q221X, C223R, C223Y, D234Y, G271C, A288P, P293A, R301G, I303N, I317T, E341D, P362L, R363C, R363H, G373D, I384N, T385P, Q396X, E398K, S401X, P409A, g7325insC, g7384del13, g8341delG, g8391del4/ins3, g10511delTAGT, g10704delACAG, g11019insG, g11021insG, and g11048delAGG. In the remaining five Fabry families, four previously reported mutations were detected (W81X, R112C, g11011delTC, and g11050delGAG) of which the R112C substitution was found in two families who were unrelated by haplotyping. These studies further define the heterogeneity of mutations in the alpha-Gal A gene causing the classical Fabry disease phenotype, and permit precise carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis in these families.",3 4
"Obesity and eating behaviour in a three-generation Chilean family with carriers of the Thrl50Ile mutation in the melanocortin-4 receptor gene. || Adult Aged Body Composition Body Mass Index Child Chile Family Characteristics Feeding Behavior Female Gene Frequency Heterozygote Humans Isoleucine Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Obesity Pedigree Penetrance Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Threonine || It has been proposed that functional mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) gene have an important impact in body mass index, being considered as a major susceptibility gene for obesity. A number of mutations have been reported in the MC4R gene in subjects from different countries and ethnic groups. However, no reports of MC4R mutations are have been published for South American populations. In this study, DNA samples of thirty-two unrelated obese women of Chilean origin were examined to search for genetic variants in the single exon of the gene through the use of single strand conformational polymorphism techniques and direct sequencing, leading to the identification of a Thr150Ile mutation in heterozygous status. The evaluation of family relatives of the index case for this mutation using PCR-RFLP analysis, identified two additional carriers in a three-generation family. Obesity, eating behavior and body composition phenotypes in this family revealed a possible relation of this variant with obesity in the presence of reduced penetrance. According to our knowledge, this is the first report of MC4R mutations in South American populations.",2 4
"One third of Danish hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients with MYH7 mutations have mutations [corrected] in MYH7 rod region. || Amino Acid Substitution Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Denmark Female Humans Male Myosin Heavy Chains Point Mutation Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Ventricular Myosins || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) is, in most cases, a disease of the sarcomere, caused by a mutation in one of 10 known sarcomere disease genes. More than 266 mutations have been identified since 1989. The FHC disease gene first characterized MYH7, encodes the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain, and contains more than 115 of these mutations. However, in most studies, only the region encoding the globular head and the hinge region of the mature cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain have been investigated. Furthermore, most studies carries out screening for mutations in the most prevalent disease genes, and discontinues screening when an apparent disease-associated mutation has been identified. The aim of the present study was to screen for mutations in the rod region of the MYH7 gene in all probands of the cohort, regardless of the known genetic status of the proband. Three disease-causing mutations were identified in the rod region in four probands using capillary electrophoresis single-strand conformation polymorphism as a screening method. All mutations were novel: N1327K, R1712W, and E1753K. Two of the probands had already been shown to carry other FHC-associated mutations. In conclusion, we show that in the Danish cohort we find one third of all MYH7 mutations in the rod-encoding region and we find that two of the patients carrying these mutations also carry mutations in other FHC disease genes stressing the need for a complete screening of all known disease genes in FHC-patients.",2 4
"SLC26A4 gene is frequently involved in nonsyndromic hearing impairment with enlarged vestibular aqueduct in Caucasian populations. || Adolescent Adult Alleles Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Connexin 26 Connexins Deafness European Continental Ancestry Group Female Goiter Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Homozygote Humans Infant Male Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Prevalence Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Vestibular Aqueduct || Sensorineural hearing loss is the most frequent sensory deficit of childhood and is of genetic origin in up to 75% of cases. It has been shown that mutations of the SLC26A4 (PDS) gene were involved in syndromic deafness characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing impairment and goitre (Pendred's syndrome), as well as in congenital isolated deafness (DFNB4). While the prevalence of SLC26A4 mutations in Pendred's syndrome is clearly established, it remains to be studied in large cohorts of patients with nonsyndromic deafness and detailed clinical informations. In this report, 109 patients from 100 unrelated families, aged from 1 to 32 years (median age: 10 years), with nonsyndromic deafness and enlarged vestibular aqueduct, were genotyped for SLC26A4 using DHPLC molecular screening and sequencing. In all, 91 allelic variants were observed in 100 unrelated families, of which 19 have never been reported. The prevalence of SLC26A4 mutations was 40% (40/100), with biallelic mutation in 24% (24/100), while six families were homozygous. All patients included in this series had documented deafness, associated with EVA and without any evidence of syndromic disease. Among patients with SLC26A4 biallelic mutations, deafness was more severe, fluctuated more than in patients with no mutation. In conclusion, the incidence of SLC26A4 mutations is high in patients with isolated deafness and enlarged vestibular aqueduct and could represent up to 4% of nonsyndromic hearing impairment. SLC26A4 could be the second most frequent gene implicated in nonsyndromic deafness after GJB2, in this Caucasian population.",3 1 4
"Novel human pathological mutations. Gene symbol: GAA. Disease: glycogen storage disease 2. || Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence Codon Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Mutation, Missense alpha-Glucosidases || ",4
"Differential regulation of PTEN expression by androgen receptor in prostate and breast cancers. || Base Sequence Breast Neoplasms Carcinoma Cell Line, Tumor Female Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data PTEN Phosphohydrolase Point Mutation Promoter Regions, Genetic Prostatic Neoplasms Receptors, Androgen Sex Factors || Prostate cancer and breast cancer are the most common malignancies in the western world. Androgen receptor (AR) and PTEN both have been well documented to have important roles in prostate carcinogenesis. In contrast, AR and PTEN in breast carcinogenesis have not been well studied. Furthermore, the crosstalk and connection between those two pathways remain unclear. Increased AR expression in prostate cancers, combined with decreased PTEN expression, portends a poor clinical outcome. Paradoxically, both high AR and high PTEN levels, detected by immunohistochemistry, in primary breast carcinomas have been associated with better disease-free survival. Here, we performed in silico analysis of publicly available microarray data sets from prostate or breast carcinomas. We found an inverse correlation between AR and PTEN transcript expression in prostate cancer tissues in contrast to the positive correlation in breast cancer. These data led us to hypothesize that AR may directly affect PTEN transcriptional regulation in prostate and breast cancer cells. Here, we show for the first time that AR inhibits PTEN transcription in prostate cancer cells, whereas AR upregulates PTEN transcription in breast cancer cells, which mechanistically explains both the immunohistochemical PTEN-AR expressional data noted in clinical trials and in our in silico analysis of the transcriptomes of breast and prostate cancers. In addition, we have fine-mapped the AR-binding motif within the PTEN promoter. Here we show that, in patients with Cowden syndrome, an inherited cancer syndrome caused by germline mutations scattered throughout PTEN, point variants affecting the 3' end of the AR-binding motif result in abrogation of androgen-mediated transcriptional regulation of PTEN expression. We may speculate that the differential AR effect on PTEN may begin to explain organ-specific and perhaps sex-specific neoplasia predisposition in Cowden syndrome, as well as why only a fraction of women with germline PTEN mutations develop breast cancer, depending on the androgen steroid milieu and levels.",4 0
"The molecular basis of familial hypercholesterolemia in the Czech Republic: spectrum of LDLR mutations and genotype-phenotype correlations. || Adolescent Adult Apolipoproteins B Biomarkers Chi-Square Distribution Child Czech Republic DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Frequency Genetic Association Studies Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Linear Models Lipids Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Receptors, LDL Risk Assessment Risk Factors Young Adult || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), a major risk for coronary heart disease, is predominantly associated with mutations in the genes encoding the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and its ligand apolipoprotein B (APOB). In this study, we characterize the spectrum of mutations causing FH in 2239 Czech probands suspected to have FH. In this set, we found 265 patients (11.8%) with the APOB mutation p.(Arg3527Gln) and 535 patients (23.9%) with a LDLR mutation. In 535 probands carrying the LDLR mutation, 127 unique allelic variants were detected: 70.1% of these variants were DNA substitutions, 16.5% small DNA rearrangements, and 13.4% large DNA rearrangements. Fifty five variants were novel, not described in other FH populations. For lipid profile analyses, FH probands were divided into groups [patients with the LDLR mutation (LDLR+), with the APOB mutation (APOB+), and without a detected mutation (LDLR-/APOB-)], and each group into subgroups according to gender. The statistical analysis of lipid profiles was performed in 1722 probands adjusted for age in which biochemical data were obtained without FH treatment (480 LDLR+ patients, 222 APOB+ patients, and 1020 LDLR-/APOB- patients). Significant gradients in i) total cholesterol (LDLR+ patients > APOB+ patients = LDLR-/APOB- patients) ii) LDL cholesterol (LDLR+ patients > APOB+ patients = LDLR-/APOB- patients in men and LDLR+patients > APOB+ patients >LDLR-/APOB- patients in women), iii) triglycerides (LDLR-/APOB- patients > LDLR+ patients > APOB+ patients), and iv) HDL cholesterol (APOB+ patients > LDLR-/APOB- patients = LDLR+ patients) were shown. Our study presents a large set of Czech patients with FH diagnosis in which DNA diagnostics was performed and which allowed statistical analysis of clinical and biochemical data.",4
"Male breast cancer in Cowden syndrome patients with germline PTEN mutations. || Adult Aged Breast Neoplasms Breast Neoplasms, Male DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Family Health Fatal Outcome Female Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Cowden syndrome (CS) (OMIM 158350) is a multiple hamartoma syndrome associated with germline mutations in the PTEN tumour suppressor gene. While CS is characterised most commonly by non-cancerous lesions (mucocutaneous trichilemmomas, acral and palmoplantar keratoses, and papillomatous papules), it is also associated with an increased susceptibility to breast cancer (in females) and thyroid cancer, as well as non-cancerous conditions of the breast and thyroid. Here we report two cases of male breast cancer occurring in patients with classical CS phenotypes and germline PTEN mutations. The first subject was diagnosed with CS indicated primarily by mucocutaneous papillomatosis, facial trichilemmomas, and macrocephaly with frontal bossing at the age of 31 years. He developed breast cancer at 41 years and subsequently died of the disease. A PTEN mutation, c.802delG, was identified in this subject, yet none of his family members showed evidence of a CS phenotype, suggesting that this PTEN mutation may be a de novo occurrence. The second subject had a CS phenotype including multiple trichilemmomas and thyroid adenoma, developed male breast cancer at 43 years, and died of the disease at 57 years. He was a carrier of a PTEN mutation c.347-351delACAAT that cosegregated with the CS phenotype in affected family members. These two cases of male breast cancer associated with germline PTEN mutations and the CS phenotype suggest that CS may be associated with an increased risk of early onset male as well as female breast cancer.",2 4 3
"Sanger Confirmation Is Required to Achieve Optimal Sensitivity and Specificity in Next-Generation Sequencing Panel Testing. || Alleles Biomarkers, Tumor Gene Frequency Genetic Testing High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Mutation Neoplasms Reproducibility of Results Sensitivity and Specificity Sequence Analysis, DNA || Next-generation sequencing (NGS) has rapidly replaced Sanger sequencing as the method of choice for diagnostic gene-panel testing. For hereditary-cancer testing, the technical sensitivity and specificity of the assay are paramount as clinicians use results to make important clinical management and treatment decisions. There is significant debate within the diagnostics community regarding the necessity of confirming NGS variant calls by Sanger sequencing, considering that numerous laboratories report having 100% specificity from the NGS data alone. Here we report our results from 20,000 hereditary-cancer NGS panels spanning 47 genes, in which all 7845 nonpolymorphic variants were Sanger- sequenced. Of these, 98.7% were concordant between NGS and Sanger sequencing and 1.3% were identified as NGS false-positives, located mainly in complex genomic regions (A/T-rich regions, G/C-rich regions, homopolymer stretches, and pseudogene regions). Simulating a false-positive rate of zero by adjusting the variant-calling quality-score thresholds decreased the sensitivity of the assay from 100% to 97.8%, resulting in the missed detection of 176 Sanger-confirmed variants, the majority in complex genomic regions (n = 114) and mosaic mutations (n = 7). The data illustrate the importance of setting quality thresholds for panel testing only after thousands of samples have been processed and the necessity of Sanger confirmation of NGS variants to maintain the highest possible sensitivity.",4
"The electrocardiogram is a more sensitive indicator than echocardiography of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in families with a mutation in the MYH7 gene. || Adult Aged Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier State Child DNA Mutational Analysis DNA Primers Echocardiography Electrocardiography Female Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Myosins Pedigree Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction || Mutations in the cardiac beta myosin heavy chain gene causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy have been identified, and to assist both diagnosis and prediction of outcome attempts have been made to correlate phenotype and genotype. Two new mutations in codon 403 of the gene in three unrelated families are described and attention drawn to variable or even absent phenotypic expression in different family members. The polymerase chain reaction and heteroduplex analysis on Mutation Detection Enhancement gels were used to search for mutations in the globular head of the beta myosin heavy chain gene in families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Two mutations were found in exon 13 (codon 403) of the gene. In two unrelated Polish families the mutation resulted in the conversion of arginine to tryptophan (CGG: >TGG). A second mutation, found in a British family, converted the same arginine to leucine (CGG: >CTG). These mutations were detected in family members who had electrocardiographic and echocardiographic features typical of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; however, they were also detected in 7 other adult relatives with an abnormal electrocardiogram but a normal echocardiogram. Two unrelated adult relatives had completely normal clinical findings but carried the gene mutation. Identification of a specific mutation gives no guide to the clinical phenotype. There is considerable variability in the phenotypic expression of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Mutations were detected in adults previously regarded as normal or in whom the diagnosis was questionable. The fact that the clinical significance of the mutation in these people is still unknown emphasises the dilemma facing screening programmes. Isolated, unexplained electrocardiographic abnormalities in first degree relatives in a family with a definitive diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy should be regarded as evidence of a carrier state.",2 4
"Targeted Screening of Fabry Disease in Male Hemodialysis Patients in Brazil Highlights Importance of Family Screening. ||  || Fabry disease (FD) is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by enzyme α galactosidase A (α-Gal A) deficiency due to mutations in the galactosidase alpha (GLA) gene. It leads to damage several organs, such as the kidneys, due to progressive accumulation of glycosphingolipids. To estimate the prevalence of FD among male hemodialysis (HD) patients in a northern state of Brazil. Screening was performed using a dried blood spot on filter paper to identify patients with low α-Gal A enzyme activity (≤2.2 µmol/l/h). Those with low enzyme activity underwent genetic analysis of the GLA gene. Family screening was conducted in the index cases. 2,583 male HD patients (age: 52 (18-91 years)) were screened. The α-Gal A assay identified 72 males (2.78%) with low enzyme activity. Genotyping identified 3 patients with GLA mutations: W204X, A368T, both previously reported; and C52F, a novel missense mutation. Only the patient with W204X mutation had classic FD. The prevalence rate was 0.12%. Family screening of the index cases identified 23 family members with the same mutations. The prevalence of FD amongst male HD patients found in the Northern of Brazil was low (0.12%). However, family screening of the 3 index cases identified family members at an early stage of the disease, which may benefit from earlier treatment.",2 4 0
"Familial hyperglycemia due to mutations in glucokinase. Definition of a subtype of diabetes mellitus. || Adult Age Factors Base Sequence Blood Glucose Child DNA Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Exons Female Genetic Linkage Glucokinase Glucose Tolerance Test Humans Hyperglycemia Infant Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic || Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. Maturity-onset diabetes of the young, a form of NIDDM with an early age of onset and autosomal dominant inheritance, can result from mutations in glucokinase, a key enzyme of glucose metabolism in beta cells and the liver. We studied 32 French families with maturity-onset diabetes of the young as well as 21 families with late-onset NIDDM to determine the frequency and clinical features of mutations of glucokinase. Fasting plasma glucose concentrations and oral glucose-tolerance tests were used to determine metabolic status. DNA was isolated from lymphocytes, and DNA polymorphisms in the glucokinase gene were tested for linkage with diabetes. Individual exons of the glucokinase gene from one affected member in each family were amplified by the polymerase chain reaction and screened for mutations by analysis of the conformation-dependent polymorphisms of single-stranded DNA and by DNA sequencing. We found substantial evidence of linkage between the glucokinase locus and maturity-onset diabetes of the young but not between this locus and late-onset NIDDM: Sixteen mutations were identified in 18 of the 32 families with maturity-onset diabetes of the young, but none were found in families with late-onset NIDDM: They included 10 mutations that resulted in an amino acid substitution, 3 that resulted in the synthesis of a truncated protein, and 3 that affected RNA processing. The affected subjects with glucokinase mutations usually had mild hyperglycemia that began during childhood, whereas in subjects with maturity-onset diabetes of the young not due to glucokinase mutations, hyperglycemia usually appeared after puberty. Mutations in glucokinase are the primary cause of hyperglycemia in a substantial fraction of French patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young and result in a relatively mild form of NIDDM that can be diagnosed in childhood.",4
"Expansion of the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum in patients with KRAS germline mutations. || Abnormalities, Multiple Europe Female Genes, ras Genetic Variation Germ-Line Mutation Humans Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Male Noonan Syndrome Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases || Noonan syndrome, cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC) and Costello syndrome constitute a group of developmental disorders with an overlapping pattern of congenital anomalies. Each of these conditions can be caused by germline mutations in key components of the highly conserved Ras-MAPK pathway, possibly reflecting a similar pathogenesis underlying the three disorders. Germline mutations in KRAS have recently been identified in a small number of patients with Noonan syndrome and CFC. 260 patients were screened for KRAS mutations by direct sequencing. Overall, we detected KRAS mutations in 12 patients, including three known and eight novel sequence alterations. All mutations are predicted to cause single amino acid substitutions. Remarkably, our cohort of individuals with KRAS mutations showed a high clinical variability, ranging from Noonan syndrome to CFC, and also included two patients who met the clinical criteria of Costello syndrome. Our findings reinforce the picture of a clustered distribution of disease associated KRAS germline alterations. We further defined the phenotypic spectrum associated with KRAS missense mutations and provided the first evidence of clinical differences in patients with KRAS mutations compared with Noonan syndrome affected individuals with heterozygous PTPN11 mutations and CFC patients carrying a BRAF, MEK1 or MEK1 alteration, respectively. We speculate that the observed phenotypic variability may be related, at least in part, to specific genotypes and possibly reflects the central role of K-Ras in a number of different signalling pathways.",4
"Systematic Population Screening, Using Biomarkers and Genetic Testing, Identifies 2.5% of the U.K. Pediatric Diabetes Population With Monogenic Diabetes. || Adolescent Antigens, CD Autoantibodies Biomarkers C-Peptide Child Child, Preschool Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Diagnosis, Differential England Female Genetic Testing Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4 Humans Infant Male Prevalence Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Receptor, Insulin Scotland Sequence Analysis, DNA Sulfonylurea Receptors Young Adult || Monogenic diabetes is rare but is an important diagnosis in pediatric diabetes clinics. These patients are often not identified as this relies on the recognition of key clinical features by an alert clinician. Biomarkers (islet autoantibodies and C-peptide) can assist in the exclusion of patients with type 1 diabetes and allow systematic testing that does not rely on clinical recognition. Our study aimed to establish the prevalence of monogenic diabetes in U.K. pediatric clinics using a systematic approach of biomarker screening and targeted genetic testing. We studied 808 patients (79.5% of the eligible population) <20 years of age with diabetes who were attending six pediatric clinics in South West England and Tayside, Scotland. Endogenous insulin production was measured using the urinary C-peptide creatinine ratio (UCPCR). C-peptide-positive patients (UCPCR ≥0.2 nmol/mmol) underwent islet autoantibody (GAD and IA2) testing, with patients who were autoantibody negative undergoing genetic testing for all 29 identified causes of monogenic diabetes. A total of 2.5% of patients (20 of 808 patients) (95% CI 1.6-3.9%) had monogenic diabetes (8 GCK, 5 HNF1A, 4 HNF4A, 1 HNF1B, 1 ABCC8, 1 INSR). The majority (17 of 20 patients) were managed without insulin treatment. A similar proportion of the population had type 2 diabetes (3.3%, 27 of 808 patients). This large systematic study confirms a prevalence of 2.5% of patients with monogenic diabetes who were <20 years of age in six U.K. clinics. This figure suggests that ∼50% of the estimated 875 U.K. pediatric patients with monogenic diabetes have still not received a genetic diagnosis. This biomarker screening pathway is a practical approach that can be used to identify pediatric patients who are most appropriate for genetic testing.",4
"Evaluation of Patients and Families With Concern for Predispositions to Hematologic Malignancies Within the Hereditary Hematologic Malignancy Clinic (HHMC). || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Biomarkers, Tumor Family Female Genetic Counseling Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Hematologic Neoplasms High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Middle Aged Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary Patients Pedigree Referral and Consultation Texas Workflow Young Adult || Although multiple predispositions to hematologic malignancies exist, evaluations for hereditary cancer syndromes (HCS) are underperformed by most hematologist/oncologists. Criteria for initiating HCS evaluation are poorly defined, and results of genetic testing for hereditary hematologic malignancies have not been systematically reported. From April 2014 to August 2015, 67 patients were referred to the Hereditary Hematologic Malignancy Clinic (HHMC). Referral reasons included (1) bone marrow failure or myelodysplastic syndrome in patients ≤ 50 years, (2) evaluation for germ-line inheritance of identified RUNX1, GATA2, or CEBPA mutations on targeted next-generation sequencing panels, and (3) strong personal and/or family history of malignancy. Cultured skin fibroblasts were utilized for germ-line DNA in all patients with hematologic malignancy. Eight patients (12%) were clinically diagnosed with a HCS: 4 patients with RUNX1-related familial platelet disorder (FPD)/acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and 1 patient each with dyskeratosis congenita, Fanconi anemia, germ-line DDX41, and Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). Two patients with concern for FPD/AML and LFS, respectively, had RUNX1 and TP53 variants of unknown significance. Additionally, 4 patients with prior HCS diagnosis (1 LFS, 3 FPD/AML) were referred for further evaluation and surveillance. In this HHMC-referred hematologic malignancy cohort, HCS was confirmed in 12 patients (18%). HCS identification provides insight for improved and individualized treatment, as well as screening/surveillance opportunities for family members. The HHMC has facilitated HCS diagnosis; with increased clinical awareness of hematologic malignancy predisposition syndromes, more patients who may benefit from evaluation can be identified. Mutation panels intended for prognostication may provide increased clinical suspicion for germ-line testing.",4
"A functionally significant SNP in TP53 and breast cancer risk in African-American women. ||  || A coding region polymorphism exists in the TP53 gene (Pro47Ser; rs1800371) in individuals of African descent, which reduces p53 tumor suppressor function in a mouse model. It has been unclear whether this functionally significant polymorphism alters cancer risk in humans. This analysis included 6907 women with breast cancer and 7644 controls from the AMBER, ROOT, and AABC consortia. We used multivariable logistic regression to estimate associations between the TP53 Pro47Ser allele and overall breast cancer risk. Because polymorphisms inTP53 tend to be associated with cancer risk in pre-menopausal women, we also limited our analyses to this population in the AMBER and ROOT consortia, where menopausal status was known, and conducted a fixed effects meta-analysis. In an analysis of all women in the AMBER, ROOT, and AABC consortia, we found no evidence for association of the Pro47Ser variant with breast cancer risk. However, when we restricted our analysis to only pre-menopausal women from the AMBER and ROOT consortia, there was a per allele odds ratio of 1.72 (95% confidence interval 1.08-2.76;p-value = 0.023). Although the Pro47Ser variant was not associated with overall breast cancer risk, it may increase risk among pre-menopausal women of African ancestry. Following up on more studies in human populations may better elucidate the role of this variant in breast cancer etiology. However, because of the low frequency of the polymorphism in women of African ancestry, its impact at a population level may be minimal.",4
"Molecular basis of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome: an update from the French LFS families. || Female France Gene Deletion Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Mutation, Missense Neoplasms Pedigree || We have performed an extensive analysis of TP53 in 474 French families suggestive of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), including 232 families fulfilling the Chompret criteria. We identified a germline alteration of TP53 in 82 families (17%), in 67/232 of the families fulfilling the Chompret criteria (29%) and in 15/242 which did not fulfil these criteria (6%). Most of the alterations corresponded to missense mutations (67%), and we identified in four families genomic deletions removing the entire TP53 locus, the promoter and the non-coding exon 1, or exons 2-10. These results represent a definitive argument demonstrating that LFS results from TP53 haplodeficiency. The mean ages of tumour onset were significantly different between patients harbouring TP53 missense mutations and other types of alterations, missense mutations being associated with a 9 year earlier tumour onset. These results confirm that missense mutations not only inactivate p53 but also have an additional oncogenic effect. Germline alterations of TP53 that lead exclusively to loss of function are therefore associated with a later age of tumour onset and the presence of such mutations should be considered in atypical LFS families with tumours diagnosed after 40 years.",3 4
"Identification and characterization of LDL receptor gene mutations in hyperlipidemic Chinese. || Animals Asian Continental Ancestry Group Base Sequence COS Cells DNA, Complementary Endosomes Exons Golgi Apparatus Haplotypes Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Lysosomes Molecular Sequence Data Pedigree Point Mutation Polymorphism, Genetic Receptors, LDL Transfection || DNA screening for LDL receptor mutations was performed in 170 unrelated hyperlipidemic Chinese patients and two clinically diagnosed familial hypercholesterolemia patients. Two deletions (Del e3-5 and Del e6-8), eight point mutations (W-18X, D69N, R94H, E207K, C308Y, I402T, A410T, and A696G), and two polymorphisms (A370T and I602V) were identified. Of these mutations, C308Y and Del e6-8 were found in homozygosity, and D69N and C308Y were seen in unrelated patients. The effects of mutations on LDL receptor function were characterized in COS-7 cells. The LDL receptor level and activity were close to those of wild type in A696G transfected cells. A novel intermediate protein and reduction of LDL receptor activity were seen in D69N transfected cells. For R94H, E207K, C308Y, I402T, and A410T mutations, only approximately 20-64% of normal receptor activities were seen. Conversely, Del e3-5 and Del e6-8 lead to defective proteins with approximately 0-13% activity. Most of the mutant receptors were localized intracellularly, with a staining pattern resembling that of the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus (D69N, R94H, E207K, C308Y, and I402T) or endosome/lysosome (A410T and Del e6-8). Molecular analysis of the LDL receptor gene will clearly identify the cause of the patient's hyperlipidemia and allow appropriate early treatment as well as antenatal and family studies.",4 0
"Mutations in sarcomere protein genes as a cause of dilated cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Amino Acid Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Dilated Child Child, Preschool Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 Female Genes, Dominant Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense Myocardial Contraction Myocardium Myosin Heavy Chains Nonmuscle Myosin Type IIB Pedigree Sarcomeres Troponin T Ultrasonography || The molecular basis of idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy, a primary myocardial disorder that results in reduced contractile function, is largely unknown. Some cases of familial dilated cardiomyopathy are caused by mutations in cardiac cytoskeletal proteins; this finding implicates defects in contractile-force transmission as one mechanism underlying this disorder. To elucidate this important cause of heart failure, we investigated other genetic causes of dilated cardiomyopathy. Clinical evaluations were performed in 21 kindreds with familial dilated cardiomyopathy. A genome-wide linkage study prompted a search of the genes encoding beta-myosin heavy chain, troponin T, troponin I, and alpha-tropomyosin for disease-causing mutations. A genetic locus for mutations associated with dilated cardiomyopathy was identified at chromosome 14q11.2-13 (maximal lod score, 5.11; theta=0), where the gene for cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain is encoded. Analyses of this and other genes for sarcomere proteins identified disease-causing dominant mutations in four kindreds. Cardiac beta-myosin heavy-chain missense mutations (Ser532Pro and Phe764Leu) and a deletion in cardiac troponin T (deltaLys210) caused early-onset ventricular dilatation (average age at diagnosis, 24 years) and diminished contractile function and frequently resulted in heart failure. Affected persons had neither antecedent cardiac hypertrophy (average maximal left-ventricular-wall thickness, 8.5 mm) nor histopathological findings characteristic of hypertrophy. Mutations in sarcomere protein genes account for approximately 10 percent of cases of familial dilated cardiomyopathy and are particularly prevalent in families with early-onset ventricular dilatation and dysfunction. Because distinct mutations in sarcomere proteins cause either dilated or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the effects of mutant sarcomere proteins on muscle mechanics must trigger two different series of events that remodel the heart.",2 4
"Two novel mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene associated with dilated cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Arginine Blood Pressure Cardiomyopathy, Dilated Child Female Finland Follow-Up Studies Genetic Predisposition to Disease Glutamine Heart Failure Humans Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular Male Middle Aged Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Sarcomeres Stroke Volume Tropomyosin Troponin C Troponin I Troponin T Tryptophan Ventricular Myosins || Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is familial in approximately 20-35% of cases of idiopathic DCM. Several mutations in the different sarcomere protein genes have been reported to cause DCM. We wanted to investigate the role of sarcomere protein gene variants in Finnish DCM patients. We screened all coding exons of five sarcomere protein genes (beta-myosin heavy chain, alpha-tropomyosin, troponin C, troponin I and troponin T) in a well-characterized population of 52 DCM patients in Eastern Finland by the PCR-SSCP and sequencing method. Two novel mutations, Arg1053Gln and Arg1500Trp, in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene in two index patients were detected. The proband with the Arg1053Gln mutation had a dilated left ventricle and impaired systolic function, but other family members carrying this mutation presented with septal hypertrophy. It thus seems that the Arg1053Gln mutation is primarily a HCM mutation, which can also lead to DCM. The other mutation, Arg1500Trp, was associated with a typical DCM phenotype. The Arg1500Trp mutation carrier had only one family member alive, but she did not carry the mutation and, therefore, cosegregation of the mutation and the disease in this family could not be reliably verified. No disease-causing mutations were found in the other sarcomere protein genes. Two novel mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene were detected in patients with DCM. Overall, mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene seem to be relatively uncommon in Finnish DCM patients.",2 4
"Mutations in MYH7 reduce the force generating capacity of sarcomeres in human familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adult Aged Calcium Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Cell Enlargement Female Fibrosis Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Myocardial Contraction Myocytes, Cardiac Myofibrils Myosin Heavy Chains Sarcomeres Young Adult || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), frequently caused by sarcomeric gene mutations, is characterized by cellular dysfunction and asymmetric left-ventricular (LV) hypertrophy. We studied whether cellular dysfunction is due to an intrinsic sarcomere defect or cardiomyocyte remodelling. Cardiac samples from 43 sarcomere mutation-positive patients (HCMmut: mutations in thick (MYBPC3, MYH7) and thin (TPM1, TNNI3, TNNT2) myofilament genes) were compared with 14 sarcomere mutation-negative patients (HCMsmn), eight patients with secondary LV hypertrophy due to aortic stenosis (LVHao) and 13 donors. Force measurements in single membrane-permeabilized cardiomyocytes revealed significantly lower maximal force generating capacity (Fmax) in HCMmut (21 ± 1 kN/m²) and HCMsmn (26 ± 3 kN/m²) compared with donor (36 ± 2 kN/m²). Cardiomyocyte remodelling was more severe in HCMmut compared with HCMsmn based on significantly lower myofibril density (49 ± 2 vs. 63 ± 5%) and significantly higher cardiomyocyte area (915 ± 15 vs. 612 ± 11 μm²). Low Fmax in MYBPC3mut, TNNI3mut, HCMsmn, and LVHao was normalized to donor values after correction for myofibril density. However, Fmax was significantly lower in MYH7mut, TPM1mut, and TNNT2mut even after correction for myofibril density. In accordance, measurements in single myofibrils showed very low Fmax in MYH7mut, TPM1mut, and TNNT2mut compared with donor (respectively, 73 ± 3, 70 ± 7, 83 ± 6, and 113 ± 5 kN/m²). In addition, force was lower in MYH7mut cardiomyocytes compared with MYBPC3mut, HCMsmn, and donor at submaximal [Ca²⁺]. Low cardiomyocyte Fmax in HCM patients is largely explained by hypertrophy and reduced myofibril density. MYH7 mutations reduce force generating capacity of sarcomeres at maximal and submaximal [Ca²⁺]. These hypocontractile sarcomeres may represent the primary abnormality in patients with MYH7 mutations.",4
"Cancer Susceptibility Gene Mutations in Individuals With Colorectal Cancer. || Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Protein Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Checkpoint Kinase 2 Colorectal Neoplasms Colorectal Neoplasms, Hereditary Nonpolyposis DNA Glycosylases DNA Mutational Analysis DNA-Binding Proteins Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group N Protein Female Genes, BRCA1 Genes, BRCA2 Genes, p16 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Middle Aged Mismatch Repair Endonuclease PMS2 MutL Protein Homolog 1 MutS Homolog 2 Protein Nuclear Proteins Penetrance Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Tumor Suppressor Proteins Young Adult || Purpose Hereditary factors play an important role in colorectal cancer (CRC) risk, yet the prevalence of germline cancer susceptibility gene mutations in patients with CRC unselected for high-risk features (eg, early age at diagnosis, personal/family history of cancer or polyps, tumor microsatellite instability [MSI], mismatch repair [MMR] deficiency) is unknown. Patients and Methods We recruited 1,058 participants who received CRC care in a clinic-based setting without preselection for age at diagnosis, personal/family history, or MSI/MMR results. All participants underwent germline testing for mutations in 25 genes associated with inherited cancer risk. Each gene was categorized as high penetrance or moderate penetrance on the basis of published estimates of the lifetime cancer risks conferred by pathogenic germline mutations in that gene. Results One hundred five (9.9%; 95% CI, 8.2% to 11.9%) of 1,058 participants carried one or more pathogenic mutations, including 33 (3.1%) with Lynch syndrome (LS). Twenty-eight (96.6%) of 29 available LS CRCs demonstrated abnormal MSI/MMR results. Seventy-four (7.0%) of 1,058 participants carried non-LS gene mutations, including 23 (2.2%) with mutations in high-penetrance genes (five APC, three biallelic MUTYH, 11 BRCA1/2, two PALB2, one CDKN2A, and one TP53), 15 of whom lacked clinical histories suggestive of their underlying mutation. Thirty-eight (3.6%) participants had moderate-penetrance CRC risk gene mutations (19 monoallelic MUTYH, 17 APC*I1307K, two CHEK2). Neither proband age at CRC diagnosis, family history of CRC, nor personal history of other cancers significantly predicted the presence of pathogenic mutations in non-LS genes. Conclusion Germline cancer susceptibility gene mutations are carried by 9.9% of patients with CRC. MSI/MMR testing reliably identifies LS probands, although 7.0% of patients with CRC carry non-LS mutations, including 1.0% with BRCA1/2 mutations.",4
"Clinicopathological concordance and discordance in three monozygotic twin pairs with familial Alzheimer's disease. || Age of Onset Aged Aged, 80 and over Alzheimer Disease Cerebral Infarction Disease Progression Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Neurofibrillary Tangles Parkinson Disease Pedigree Plaque, Amyloid Twins, Monozygotic || Neuropathological examination of both individuals in a monozygotic (MZ) twin pair with Alzheimer's disease (AD) is rare, especially in the molecular genetic era. We had the opportunity to assess the concordance and discordance of clinical presentation and neuropathology in three MZ twin pairs with AD. The MZ twins were identified and characterised by the University of Washington Alzheimer's Disease Research Center. We reviewed the available clinical and neuropathological records for all six cases looking specifically for concordance and discordance of clinical phenotype, neuritic amyloid plaques (NP), neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) and Lewy related pathology (LRP). Discordance in age of onset for developing AD in the MZ twins varied from 4 to 18 years. Clinical presentations also differed between twins. One twin presented with a dementia with Lewy Body clinical syndrome while the other presented with typical clinical AD. Neuropathology within the MZ twin pairs was concordant for NP and NFT, regardless of duration of disease, and was discordant for LRP. This difference was most marked in the late onset AD twin pair. One pair was found to have a mutation in presenilin-1 (PS1) (A79V) with remarkably late onset in a family member. MZ twins with AD can vary considerably in age of onset, presentation and disease duration. The concordance of NP and NFT pathological change and the discordance of LRP support the concept that, in AD, the former are primarily under genetic control whereas the latter (LRP) is more influenced by disease duration and environmental factors. The A79V mutation in PS1 can be associated with very late onset of dementia.",4
"Prevalence of monogenic diabetes in the population-based Norwegian Childhood Diabetes Registry. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1 Female Glucokinase Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4 Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Mutation Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Registries Sulfonylurea Receptors || Monogenic diabetes (MD) might be misdiagnosed as type 1 diabetes. The prevalence of MD among children with apparent type 1 diabetes has not been established. Our aim was to estimate the prevalence of common forms of MD in childhood diabetes. We investigated 2,756 children aged 0-14 years with newly diagnosed diabetes who had been recruited to the nationwide population-based Norwegian Childhood Diabetes Registry (NCDR), from July 2002 to March 2012. Completeness of ascertainment was 91%. Children diagnosed with diabetes who were under12 months of age were screened for mutations in KCNJ11, ABCC8 and INS. Children without GAD and protein tyrosine phosphatase-like protein antibodies were screened in two ways. Those who had a parent with diabetes were screened for mutations in HNF1A, HNF4A, INS and MT-TL1. Children with HbA1c <7.5% (<58 mmol/mol) and no insulin requirement were screened for mutations in GCK. Finally, we searched the Norwegian MODY Registry for children with genetically verified MD. We identified 15 children harbouring a mutation in HNF1A, nine with one in GCK, four with one in KCNJ11, one child with a mutation in INS and none with a mutation in MT-TL1. The minimum prevalence of MD in the NCDR was therefore 1.1%. By searching the Norwegian MODY Registry, we found 24 children with glucokinase-MODY, 15 of whom were not present in the NCDR. We estimated the minimum prevalence of MD among Norwegian children to be 3.1/100,000. This is the first prevalence study of the common forms of MD in a nationwide, population-based registry of childhood diabetes. We found that 1.1% of patients in the Norwegian Childhood Diabetes Registry had MD.",4
"Functional analysis of PTPN11/SHP-2 mutants identified in Noonan syndrome and childhood leukemia. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Female Humans Infant Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Leukemia, Myeloid Male Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases Mutation Noonan Syndrome Phenotype Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases SH2 Domain-Containing Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases src Homology Domains || Noonan syndrome (NS) is characterized by short stature, characteristic facial features, and heart defects. Recently, missense mutations of PTPN11, the gene encoding protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) SHP-2, were identified in patients with NS. Further, somatic mutations in PTPN11 were detected in childhood leukemia. Recent studies showed that the phosphatase activities of five mutations identified in NS and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) were increased. However, the functional properties of the other mutations remain unidentified. In this study, in order to clarify the differences between the mutations identified in NS and leukemia, we examined the phosphatase activity of 14 mutants of SHP-2. We identified nine mutations, including a novel F71I mutation, in 16 of 41 NS patients and two mutations, including a novel G503V mutation, in three of 29 patients with leukemia. Immune complex phosphatase assays of individual mutants transfected in COS7 cells showed that ten mutants identified in NS and four mutants in leukemia showed 1.4-fold to 12.7-fold increased activation compared with wild-type SHP-2. These results suggest that the pathogenesis of NS and leukemia is associated with enhanced phosphatase activity of mutant SHP-2. A comparison of the phosphatase activity in each mutant and a review of previously reported cases showed that high phosphatase activity observed in mutations at codons 61, 71, 72, and 76 was significantly associated with leukemogenesis.",4 0
"Malignant familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in a family with a 453Arg-->Cys mutation in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene: coexistence of sudden death and end-stage heart failure. || Adolescent Adult Amino Acid Sequence Arginine Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic China Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 Cysteine DNA Primers Death, Sudden Family Female Genetic Linkage Heart Failure Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Prognosis Survival Analysis || Recent genotype-phenotype correlation studies in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) have revealed that some mutations in the beta- myosin heavy chain (BMHC) gene may be associated with a high incidence of sudden death and a poor prognosis. Coexistence of sudden death and end-stage heart failure in several families with FHC has recently being reported; however, the genetic basis of such families has not been clearly demonstrated. A three-generation Chinese familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) family (family HLI) with two cases of end-stage heart failure and three cases of sudden death was analyzed. The average age of death in the affected members in this family was 34 years old. Genetic linkage analysis using polymorphisms in the (alpha- and beta-myosin heavy chain genes revealed that FHC in this family is significantly linked to the BMHC gene without recombinations. Single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis of exons 8, 9 and 13 to 23 in the BMHC gene showed a polymorphic band on exon 14 that is in complete linkage with the disease status in this family. DNA sequencing analysis in the affected members revealed an 453Arg-->Cys mutation in the BMHC gene. To our knowledge this is the first reported mutation of FHC in Chinese. Our data suggest that the 453Arg-->Cys mutation is associated with a malignant clinical course in FHC due not only to sudden death but also to end-stage heart failure.",2 4
"Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II) in Argentineans: clinical manifestations and identification of 9 novel mutations. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Argentina Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a deficiency in 1,4-alpha-glucosidase (EC.3.2.1.3), the enzyme required to hydrolyze lysosomal glycogen to glucose. While previous studies have focused on Pompe patients from Europe, the United States, and Taiwan, we have analyzed a group of South American Pompe patients to better understand the molecular basis of their disease. From 14 Argentinean patients diagnosed with either infantile or late-onset disease, we identified 14 distinct mutations in the acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) gene including nine novel variants (c.236_246del, c.377G>A, c.1099T>C, c.1397T>G, c.1755-1G>A, c.1802C>G, c.1978C>T, c.2281delGinsAT, and c.2608C>T). Three different families displayed the c.377G>A allelic variant, suggesting a higher frequency among a subset of Argentineans. Comparison of patients with similar or identical variations in the GAA gene highlights the phenotypic diversity of late-onset disease and supports a role for other genetic and environmental factors in disease presentation.",3 1 4
"Long-term prognosis of patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease diagnosed by newborn screening and treated since birth. || Age of Onset Female Follow-Up Studies Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Incidence Infant Infant, Newborn Male Neonatal Screening Prognosis Prospective Studies Recombinant Proteins Survival Rate Taiwan Time Factors alpha-Glucosidases || To determine the benefit of newborn screening for the long-term prognosis of patients with classic infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD). A cohort of patients with classic IOPD were diagnosed by newborn screening, treated with recombinant human acid α-glucosidase (rhGAA), and followed prospectively. Outcome measurements included survival, left ventricular mass, serum creatinine kinase, motor function, mental development, and systemic manifestations. Ten patients who presented with left ventricular hypertrophy at diagnosis received rhGAA infusions starting at a median age of 16 days (6-34 days). All patients were cross-reactive immunologic material-positive. After a median treatment time of 63 months (range 28-90 months), all could walk independently, and none required mechanical ventilation. All patients had motor capability sufficient for participating in daily activities, but muscle weakness over the pelvic girdle appeared gradually after 2 years of age. Ptosis was present in one-half of the patients, and speech disorders were common. Anti-rhGAA antibody titers were low (median maximal titer value 1:1600, range: undetectable ∼ 1:12,800). By studying patients treated since birth who have no significant anti-rhGAA antibody interference, this prospective study demonstrates that the efficacy of rhGAA therapy is high and consistent for the treatment of classic IOPD. This study also exposes limitations of rhGAA treatment. The etiology of the manifestations in these early-treated patients will require further study.",3 1 4
"Specificity of SLC26A4 mutations in the pathogenesis of inner ear malformations. ||  || The traditional hypothesis concerning the pathogenesis of inner ear malformations holds that various types of malformations represent different stages of developmental arrest during embryogenesis. In order to verify this hypothesis, we surveyed mutations in the SLC26A4(PDS) gene, which were documented to cause enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA) and Mondini's dysplasia (incomplete partition of the cochlea), in 35 families with various types of inner ear malformations. In 25 families, the probands showed EVA or Mondini's dysplasia as the main temporal bone abnormalities, whereas the probands in the remaining 10 families revealed other types of malformations. In total, 7 mutated SLC26A4 alleles, including 6 missense mutations (A372V, A387V, T410M, S448L, T721M, and H723R) and 1 splice site mutation (IVS7-2A-->G), were detected. All mutated alleles segregated the malformations of EVA and Mondini's dysplasia, whereas no mutated alleles were found in the 10 probands with other types of malformations. SLC26A4 mutations were found in 22 of the 25 probands with EVA or Mondini's dysplasia, indicating that these might be specific to the development of Mondini's dysplasia and EVA. It is inferred that the pathogenetic mechanisms of the various malformations essentially differ, although their radiological findings appear to follow a continuum of morphological changes.",4
"Prevalence, spectrum, and functional characterization of melanocortin-4 receptor gene mutations in a representative population-based sample and obese adults from Germany. || Adult Aged Aging Body Mass Index Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel Female Gene Frequency Genetic Testing Germany Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Obesity Phenotype Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction || Autosomal dominant inheritance of mutations in the melanocortin-4 receptor gene (MC4R) is currently regarded as the most relevant genetic cause for extreme obesity and affects 2-4% of extremely obese individuals. Our objective was to assess the relevance of MC4R mutations in a German population-based sample. We conducted a mutation screen of the MC4R gene by capillary electrophoresis-based single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and denaturing HPLC. Subjects included 4068 individuals of a German population-based study group [Kooperative Gesundheitsforschung im Raum Augsburg, Survey 4 (KORA-S4); i.e. Cooperative Health Research in the Region of Augsburg] and 1003 German obese adults (body mass index >or= 30 kg/m(2)). Samples with aberrant capillary electrophoresis-based single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis/denaturing HPLC patterns were resequenced. Functional studies including agonistic receptor stimulation (Nle-D-Phe-alpha-, alpha-, and beta-MSH) and cell surface expression assays were performed. Sixteen (six novel) coding nonsynonymous mutations were detected in 27 heterozygous individuals of KORA-S4. Four of the mutation alleles led to impaired receptor function in vitro; however, none of these six heterozygous mutation carriers was obese (body mass index >or= 30 kg/m(2)). In the obese adults, six coding nonsynonymous and a nonsense mutation were detected in 13 individuals. Only the nonsense mutation allele entailed impaired receptor function. Our study depicts prevalence, spectrum, and functional characterization of MC4R mutations in the German population-based sample KORA-S4. In this epidemiological study group, individuals heterozygous for nonsynonymous MC4R mutation alleles entailing impaired function were not obese. Furthermore, nonsynonymous MC4R mutations causing impaired receptor function were rare in German obese adults (two in 1003 = 0.2%).",4
"GJB2 mutation spectrum in 2,063 Chinese patients with nonsyndromic hearing impairment. || Algorithms Asian Continental Ancestry Group China Connexin 26 Connexins Gene Expression Regulation Hearing Disorders Humans Immunohistochemistry Mutation || Mutations in GJB2 are the most common molecular defects responsible for autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing impairment (NSHI). The mutation spectra of this gene vary among different ethnic groups. In order to understand the spectrum and frequency of GJB2 mutations in the Chinese population, the coding region of the GJB2 gene from 2063 unrelated patients with NSHI was PCR amplified and sequenced. A total of 23 pathogenic mutations were identified. Among them, five (p.W3X, c.99delT, c.155_c.158delTCTG, c.512_c.513insAACG, and p.Y152X) are novel. Three hundred and seven patients carry two confirmed pathogenic mutations, including 178 homozygotes and 129 compound heterozygotes. One hundred twenty five patients carry only one mutant allele. Thus, GJB2 mutations account for 17.9% of the mutant alleles in 2063 NSHI patients. Overall, 92.6% (684/739) of the pathogenic mutations are frame-shift truncation or nonsense mutations. The four prevalent mutations; c.235delC, c.299_c.300delAT, c.176_c.191del16, and c.35delG, account for 88.0% of all mutantalleles identified. The frequency of GJB2 mutations (alleles) varies from 4% to 30.4% among different regions of China. It also varies among different sub-ethnic groups. In some regions of China, testing of the three most common mutations can identify at least one GJB2 mutant allele in all patients. In other regions such as Tibet, the three most common mutations account for only 16% the GJB2 mutant alleles. Thus, in this region, sequencing of GJB2 would be recommended. In addition, the etiology of more than 80% of the mutant alleles for NSHI in China remains to be identified. Analysis of other NSHI related genes will be necessary.",4
"Rare variants in APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2 increase risk for AD in late-onset Alzheimer's disease families. || Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Alzheimer Disease Amyloid beta-Protein Precursor Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Presenilin-1 Presenilin-2 Progranulins tau Proteins || Pathogenic mutations in APP, PSEN1, PSEN2, MAPT and GRN have previously been linked to familial early onset forms of dementia. Mutation screening in these genes has been performed in either very small series or in single families with late onset AD (LOAD). Similarly, studies in single families have reported mutations in MAPT and GRN associated with clinical AD but no systematic screen of a large dataset has been performed to determine how frequently this occurs. We report sequence data for 439 probands from late-onset AD families with a history of four or more affected individuals. Sixty sequenced individuals (13.7%) carried a novel or pathogenic mutation. Eight pathogenic variants, (one each in APP and MAPT, two in PSEN1 and four in GRN) three of which are novel, were found in 14 samples. Thirteen additional variants, present in 23 families, did not segregate with disease, but the frequency of these variants is higher in AD cases than controls, indicating that these variants may also modify risk for disease. The frequency of rare variants in these genes in this series is significantly higher than in the 1,000 genome project (p = 5.09 × 10⁻⁵; OR = 2.21; 95%CI = 1.49-3.28) or an unselected population of 12,481 samples (p = 6.82 × 10⁻⁵; OR = 2.19; 95%CI = 1.347-3.26). Rare coding variants in APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2, increase risk for or cause late onset AD. The presence of variants in these genes in LOAD and early-onset AD demonstrates that factors other than the mutation can impact the age at onset and penetrance of at least some variants associated with AD. MAPT and GRN mutations can be found in clinical series of AD most likely due to misdiagnosis. This study clearly demonstrates that rare variants in these genes could explain an important proportion of genetic heritability of AD, which is not detected by GWAS.",4
"Haploinsufficiency of CBFA2 causes familial thrombocytopenia with propensity to develop acute myelogenous leukaemia. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Blood Platelets Chromosome Mapping Colony-Forming Units Assay Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA Mutational Analysis DNA-Binding Proteins Family Health Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Hematopoiesis Heterozygote Humans In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute Male Megakaryocytes Microsatellite Repeats Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Proto-Oncogene Proteins RNA Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Sequence Deletion Sequence Homology, Amino Acid Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid Thrombocytopenia Transcription Factors || Familial platelet disorder with predisposition to acute myelogenous leukaemia (FPD/AML, MIM 601399) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by qualitative and quantitative platelet defects, and propensity to develop acute myelogenous leukaemia (AML). Informative recombination events in 6 FPD/AML pedigrees with evidence of linkage to markers on chromosome 21q identified an 880-kb interval containing the disease gene. Mutational analysis of regional candidate genes showed nonsense mutations or intragenic deletion of one allele of the haematopoietic transcription factor CBFA2 (formerly AML1) that co-segregated with the disease in four FPD/AML pedigrees. We identified heterozygous CBFA2 missense mutations that co-segregated with the disease in the remaining two FPD/AML pedigrees at phylogenetically conserved amino acids R166 and R201, respectively. Analysis of bone marrow or peripheral blood cells from affected FPD/AML individuals showed a decrement in megakaryocyte colony formation, demonstrating that CBFA2 dosage affects megakaryopoiesis. Our findings support a model for FPD/AML in which haploinsufficiency of CBFA2 causes an autosomal dominant congenital platelet defect and predisposes to the acquisition of additional mutations that cause leukaemia.",2 4
"Germline mutation prevalence in individuals with pancreatic cancer and a history of previous malignancy. ||  || Approximately 10% of pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PC) cases are attributed to hereditary causes. Individuals with PC and a personal history of another cancer associated with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) or Lynch syndrome (LS) may be more likely to carry germline mutations. Participants with PC and a history of cancer were selected from a pancreatic disease registry. Of 1296 individuals with PC, 149 had a relevant history of cancer. If banked DNA was available, a multigene panel was performed for individuals who had not 1) previously had a mutation identified through clinical testing or 2) undergone clinical multigene panel testing with no mutations detected. Twenty-two of 124 individuals with PC and another HBOC- or LS-related cancer who underwent genetic testing had a mutation identified in a PC susceptibility gene (18%). If prostate cancer is excluded, the mutation prevalence increased to 23% (21/93). Mutation carriers were more likely to have more than 1 previous cancer diagnosis (P = .001), to have had clinical genetic testing (P = .001), and to meet National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) genetic testing criteria (P < .001). Approximately 23% of mutation carriers did not meet NCCN HBOC or LS testing guidelines based on their personal cancer history and reported cancer history in first-degree relatives. At least 18% of individuals with PC and a personal history of other HBOC- or LS-related cancers carry mutations in a PC susceptibility gene based on our data, suggesting that criteria for genetic testing in individuals with PC should include consideration of previous cancer history. Cancer 2018;124:1691-700. © 2018 American Cancer Society.",4
"Screening of MYH7, MYBPC3, and TNNT2 genes in Brazilian patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Brazil Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins DNA Female Genetic Testing Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Myosins Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction Prevalence Troponin T Young Adult || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HC) is the most prevalent genetic cardiac disease caused by a mutation in sarcomeres, Z-disks, or calcium-handling genes and is characterized by unexplained left ventricular hypertrophy. The aim of this study was to determine the genetic profile of Brazilian patients with HC and correlate the genotype with the phenotype. We included 268 index patients from São Paulo city and 3 other cities in Brazil and extracted their DNA from whole blood. We amplified the coding sequencing of MYH7, MYBPC3, and TNNT2 genes and sequenced them with an automatic sequencer. We identified causal mutations in 131 patients (48.8%). Seventy-eight (59.5%) were in the MYH7 gene, 50 (38.2%) in the MYBPC3 gene, and 3 (2.3%) in the TNNT2 gene. We identified 69 mutations, 24 not previously described. Patients with an identified mutation were younger at diagnosis and at current age, had a higher mean heart rate and higher nonsustained ventricular tachycardia frequency compared with those without a mutation. Patients with MYH7 gene mutations had a larger left atrium and higher frequency of atrial fibrillation than did patients with MYBPC3 gene mutations. The presence of a mutation in one of the genes suggests a worse prognosis. Mutations in the MYH7 gene, rather than in the MYBPC3 gene, were also related to a worse prognosis. This is the first work characterizing HC molecular epidemiology in the Brazilian population for the 3 most important genes.",4
"Clinical and prognostic evaluation of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in two South African families with different cardiac beta myosin heavy chain gene mutations. || Adolescent Adult Aged Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Child, Preschool Female Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Myosins Pedigree Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational South Africa || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most common inherited cardiac disorder, with sudden cardiac death at a young age the most frequent cause of death in affected individuals. Some cases of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are caused by missense mutations of the beta myosin heavy chain (beta MHC) gene on chromosome 14 and at least 17 such mutations have been described. Recent reports suggest that a correlation exists between a specific beta MHC gene mutation and prognosis in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This premise is currently being used as a basis to provide counselling for affected families. This mutation/prognosis association, however, has not been widely assessed as yet. The clinical and prognostic features of two South African families of mixed racial descent, in which different beta MHC gene mutations were segregating, were studied to evaluate this correlation. The results were compared with those of previously published reports of European families carrying the same mutations. The beta MHC gene missense mutations in two affected families were identified by single strand conformation polymorphism analysis and sequencing (pedigree 106: Arg403Trp; pedigree 108: Arg249Gln). All family members were subjected to genotypic analysis using polymerase chain reaction amplification and restriction enzyme based mutation detection techniques. Clinical, electrocardiographic, and echocardiographic studies were performed on genotypically affected individuals in these two kindreds. The number of individuals identified in pedigree 106 with the Arg403Trp mutation was 32.10 individuals bore the Arg249Gln mutation in pedigree 108. The penetrance rate in adults (equal to or greater than 16 years), using the strict echocardiographic criterion of maximum left ventricular wall thickness > or = 13 mm, was 25% for pedigree 106 and 33% for pedigree 108. Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy compatible electrocardiographic and echocardiographic abnormalities were seen in 60% of genotypically positive individuals aged > or = 16 years in pedigree 106 and 80% in pedigree 108. The prognosis was uniformly benign in the two families. For pedigree 106 this corresponded to a report of no early sudden cardiac deaths in a French family with the Arg403Trp mutation. For pedigree 108 the absence of such deaths was in apparent contrast to the four cases reported in 24 genotypically affected individuals in a study of a kindred of European ancestry bearing the Arg249Gln mutation. This study of a large South African kindred confirmed the benign nature of the Arg403Trp mutation suggested in a previous report. The number and the relatively young age of affected individuals in a second South African family must be considered when comparing the absence of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated deaths with the intermediate survival reported for the Arg249Gln mutation in a European family. This investigation lends support to current evidence relating specific beta MHC gene mutations to prognosis, which may be used as a basis to provide counselling for affected families.",2 4
"Identification of a rare COCH mutation by whole-exome sequencing : Implications for personalized therapeutic rehabilitation in an Austrian family with non-syndromic autosomal dominant late-onset hearing loss. ||  || Non-syndromic autosomal dominant hearing impairment is characteristically postlingual in onset. Genetic diagnostics are essential for genetic counselling, disease prognosis and understanding of the molecular mechanisms of disease. To date, 36 causative genes have been identified, many in only individual families. Gene selection for genetic screening by traditional methods and genetic diagnosis in autosomal dominant patients has therefore been fraught with difficulty. Whole-exome sequencing provides a powerful tool to analyze all protein-coding genomic regions in parallel, thus allowing the comprehensive screening of all known genes and associated alterations. In this study, a previously undiagnosed late-onset progressive autosomal dominant hearing loss in an Austrian family was investigated by means of whole-exome sequencing. Results were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. A previously described c.151C>T missense (p.Pro51Ser) mutation in the LCCL (limulus factor C, cochlin, late gestation lung protein Lgl1) domain of the cochlin gene (COCH) was identified as causative and segregated with disease in five members of the family. Molecular diagnostics led to the decision to perform cochlear implantation in an index patient who subsequently showed excellent postoperative auditory performance. The c.151C>T mutation was not found in 18 screened Austrian families with autosomal dominant hearing loss but was represented alongside other known pathogenic mutant COCH alleles in the Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD) in European populations. A combined allele frequency of 0.000128 implies an orphan disease frequency for COCH-induced hearing loss of 1:3900 in Europe. Exome sequencing successfully resolved the genetic diagnosis in a family suffering from autosomal dominant hearing impairment and allowed prediction of purported auditory outcome after cochlear implantation in an index patient. Personalized treatment approaches based on the molecular mechanisms of disease may become increasingly important in the future.",4
"Integrated analysis of germline and somatic variants in ovarian cancer. || Aged Female Germ Cells Humans Loss of Heterozygosity Middle Aged Oncogenes Ovarian Neoplasms || We report the first large-scale exome-wide analysis of the combined germline-somatic landscape in ovarian cancer. Here we analyse germline and somatic alterations in 429 ovarian carcinoma cases and 557 controls. We identify 3,635 high confidence, rare truncation and 22,953 missense variants with predicted functional impact. We find germline truncation variants and large deletions across Fanconi pathway genes in 20% of cases. Enrichment of rare truncations is shown in BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2. In addition, we observe germline truncation variants in genes not previously associated with ovarian cancer susceptibility (NF1, MAP3K4, CDKN2B and MLL3). Evidence for loss of heterozygosity was found in 100 and 76% of cases with germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 truncations, respectively. Germline-somatic interaction analysis combined with extensive bioinformatics annotation identifies 222 candidate functional germline truncation and missense variants, including two pathogenic BRCA1 and 1 TP53 deleterious variants. Finally, integrated analyses of germline and somatic variants identify significantly altered pathways, including the Fanconi, MAPK and MLL pathways.",4
"Microvascular function is selectively impaired in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and sarcomere myofilament gene mutations. || Actin Cytoskeleton Adolescent Adult Ammonia Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Carrier Proteins Coronary Circulation Dipyridamole Female Genotype Humans Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Cine Male Microcirculation Mutation Myocardium Myosin Heavy Chains Nitrogen Radioisotopes Positron-Emission Tomography Radiopharmaceuticals Regression Analysis Sarcomeres Severity of Illness Index Tropomyosin Troponin T Vasodilator Agents Ventricular Remodeling Young Adult || The purpose of this study was to assess myocardial blood flow (MBF) using positron emission tomography in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) according to genetic status. Coronary microvascular dysfunction is an important feature of HCM, associated with ventricular remodeling and heart failure. We recently demonstrated the increased prevalence of systolic dysfunction in patients with HCM with sarcomere myofilament gene mutations and postulated an association between genetic status and coronary microvascular dysfunction. Maximum MBF (intravenous dipyridamole, 0.56 mg/kg; Dip-MBF) was measured using (13)N-labeled ammonia in 61 patients with HCM (age 38 ± 14 years), genotyped by automatic DNA sequencing of 8 myofilament-encoding genes (myosin-binding protein C, beta-myosin heavy chain, regulatory and essential light chains, troponin T, troponin I, troponin C, alpha-tropomyosin, and alpha-actin). In 35 patients, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was performed. Fifty-three mutations were identified in 42 of the 61 patients (genotype positive; 69%). Despite similar clinical profiles, genotype-positive patients with HCM showed substantially lower Dip-MBF compared with that of genotype-negative patients (1.7 ± 0.6 ml/min/g vs. 2.4 ± 1.2 ml/min/g; p < 0.02). A Dip-MBF <1.5 ml/min/g had 81% positive predictive value for genotype-positive status and implied a 3.5-fold independent increase in likelihood of carrying myofilament gene mutations (hazard ratio: 3.52; 95% confidence interval: 1.05 to 11.7; p = 0.04). At cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, the prevalence of late gadolinium enhancement was greater in genotype-positive patients (22 of 23 [96%] compared with 8 of 12 [67%] genotype-negative patients; p = 0.038). Patients with HCM with sarcomere myofilament mutations are characterized by more severe impairment of microvascular function and increased prevalence of myocardial fibrosis, compared with genotype-negative individuals. These findings suggest a direct link between sarcomere gene mutations and adverse remodeling of the microcirculation in HCM, accounting for the increased long-term prevalence of ventricular dysfunction and heart failure in genotype-positive patients.",4
"Characterization of glucokinase polymorphisms associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY2) in Jordanian population. || Adult Age of Onset Arabs Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Electrophoresis, Agar Gel European Continental Ancestry Group Female Gene Frequency Glucokinase Humans Jordan Male Mutation, Missense Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic Prevalence Young Adult || Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young(MODY) is a monogenic form of Diabetes Mellitus (DM) characterized by an autosomal dominant inheritance, onset usually before 25 years of age and a primary defect in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Glucokinase (GCK) acts as a glucose sensor in the pancreatic beta cell and regulates insulin secretion. The mutation in the gene encoding GCK results in enzyme inactivation cause MODY2. Functional studies of naturally occurring GCK mutations associated with hyperglycaemia provide further insight into the biochemical basis of glucose sensor regulation. In this study 100 diabetic Jordanian patients with MODY2 phenotype and 150 Normal control subjects were screened for the presence of GCK gene mutations including the missense mutations at position Thr228Ala in exon 7, Gly299Arg in exon 8 and nonsense mutation Ser383Ter in exon 9, utilizing polymerase chain reaction with restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis. The results shows no Thr228Ala, Gly299Arg and Ser383Ter mutations were detected in both groups, which was differ from the results obtained for Italian and Caucasian from the Oxford region in UK MODY2 patients. Our data indicated that the previously studied mutations in Italian and Caucasian patients in the GCK gene are not common in MODY Jordanian population, suggesting a racial difference can be found in the frequency of the GCK polymorphism.",4
"Development of a clinical assay for detection of GAA mutations and characterization of the GAA mutation spectrum in a Canadian cohort of individuals with glycogen storage disease, type II. || Alleles DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Predisposition to Disease Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease, type II (GSDII; Pompe disease; acid maltase deficiency) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations of the GAA gene that lead to deficient acid alpha-glucosidase enzyme activity and accumulation of lysosomal glycogen. Although measurement of acid alpha-glucosidase enzyme activity in fibroblasts remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of GSDII, analysis of the GAA gene allows confirmation of clinical or biochemical diagnoses and permits predictive and prenatal testing of individuals at risk of developing GSDII. We have developed a clinical molecular test for the detection of GAA mutations based on cycle sequencing of the complete coding region. GAA exons 2-20 are amplified in six independent PCR using intronic primers. The resulting products were purified and sequenced. Preliminary studies using this protocol were conducted with DNA from 21 GSDII-affected individuals from five centers across Canada. In total, 41 of 42 mutations were detected (96.7% detection rate). Mutations spanned intron 1 through exon 19 and included nine novel mutations. Haplotype analysis of recurrent mutations further suggested that three of these mutations are likely to have occurred independently at least twice. Additionally, we report the identification of the c.-32-13T>G GAA mutation in an individual with infantile variant GSDII, despite reports of this mutation being associated almost exclusively with late-onset forms of the disease. The development of a clinical molecular test provides an important tool for the management and counseling of families and individuals with GSDII, and has provided useful information about the GAA mutation spectrum in Canada.",3 1 4
"Characteristics and prognostic implications of myosin missense mutations in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Amino Acid Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Humans Mutation Myosins Prognosis || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is characterized by a variable degree of myocardial hypertrophy and a wide range of symptoms. Different mutations in the beta cardiac myosin heavy-chain gene have been identified in three affected families. However, neither the proportion of cases attributable to myosin mutations nor the effects of different mutations on clinical outcome are known. Using a ribonuclease protection assay, we screened the beta cardiac myosin heavy-chain genes of probands from 25 unrelated families with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; this assay is a sensitive method for detecting the presence and location of mutations. We further defined the mutations by analyzing their nucleotide sequences. The clinical features of the disease were compared in families with various myosin mutations. Seven mutations in the beta cardiac myosin heavy-chain gene were identified in 12 of the 25 families. All were missense mutations (i.e., causing the substitution of a single amino acid) clustered in the head and head-rod junction regions of the molecule. Six mutations resulted in a change in the charge of the amino acid. Patients with mutations that changed the charge of the altered amino acid (such as that from arginine to glutamine at nucleotide 403 or from arginine to cysteine at nucleotide 453) had a significantly shorter life expectancy (mean age at death, 33 years), whereas patients with the one mutation that did not produce a change in charge (Val606Met) had nearly normal survival. However, patients with different mutations did not differ appreciably in their clinical manifestations of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Different missense mutations in the beta cardiac myosin heavy-chain gene can be identified in approximately 50 percent of families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. In those families, a definite genetic diagnosis can be made in all members. Since the location of a mutation or its DNA-sequence alteration (or both) appears to influence survival, we suggest that the precise definition of the disease-causing mutation can provide important prognostic information about affected members.",2 4
"In Silico Approach to Investigate the Structural and Functional Attributes of Familial Hypercholesterolemia Variants Reported in the Saudi Population. || Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Loss of Function Mutation Molecular Docking Simulation Mutation Rate Mutation, Missense Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Receptors, LDL Saudi Arabia || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a metabolic disorder that leads primarily to premature cardiovascular diseases, the main cause of mortality in Saudi Arabia (SA). FH is underreported and underdiagnosed in SA with statistical evidence of high expected prevalence in such a consanguineous community. Lacking knowledge of which and how these alterations are actually impacting lipid metabolism is one of the main reasons why FH is insufficiently diagnosed in the region. The aim of this study was to develop a fast prediction approach using an integrated bioinformatics method for future screening of the potential causative variants from national registries. A total of 21 variants were detected with majority rate in LDLR (81%). Variants were classified based on the type of mutation. Missense variants resulting in amino acid changes, c.1429G>A (p.D477N), c.1474G>A (p.D492N), c.1731G>T (p.W577C), and c.1783C>T (p.R595W) in LDLR gene, in addition to c.9835A>G (p.S3279G) in APOB, were shown to be deleterious by concordant analysis. Furthermore, functional interaction deformities showed a significant loss and gain of energies in the mutated proteins. These findings will help in distinguishing the most harmful mutations needed to be screened for clinically diagnosed FH patients in SA. Such computational research is necessary to avoid time consumption and the usage of expensive biological experiments. This can be a fast track to facilitate the future filtering and screening of causative mutations from national registries.",4
"Sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy due to de novo myosin mutations. || Adult Aged Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Female Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Myosins || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy occurs as an autosomal dominant familial disorder or as a sporadic disease without familial involvement. While missense mutations in the beta cardiac myosin heavy chain (MHC) gene account for approximately half of all cases of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the molecular causes of sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are unknown. To determine whether beta cardiac MHC mutations are also associated with sporadic disease, we screened this gene in seven individuals with sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Mutations in the beta cardiac MHC genes were identified in two probands with sporadic disease. In that their parents were neither clinically nor genetically affected, we conclude that mutations in each proband arose de novo. Transmission of the mutation and disease to an offspring occurred in one pedigree, predicting that these are germline mutations. The demonstration of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy arising within a pedigree coincident with the appearance of a de novo mutation provides compelling genetic evidence that beta cardiac MHC mutations cause this disease. We suggest that de novo mutations account for some instances of sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and that these mutations can be transmitted to children. The clinical benefits of defining mutations responsible for familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy should also be available to some patients with sporadic disease.",4
"Update on mutations in glucokinase (GCK), which cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young, permanent neonatal diabetes, and hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. ||  || Glucokinase is a key regulatory enzyme in the pancreatic beta-cell. It plays a crucial role in the regulation of insulin secretion and has been termed the glucose sensor in pancreatic beta-cells. Given its central role in the regulation of insulin release it is understandable that mutations in the gene encoding glucokinase (GCK) can cause both hyper- and hypoglycemia. Heterozygous inactivating mutations in GCK cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) subtype glucokinase (GCK), characterized by mild fasting hyperglycemia, which is present at birth but often only detected later in life during screening for other purposes. Homozygous inactivating GCK mutations result in a more severe phenotype presenting at birth as permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus (PNDM). A growing number of heterozygous activating GCK mutations that cause hypoglycemia have also been reported. A total of 620 mutations in the GCK gene have been described in a total of 1,441 families. There are no common mutations, and the mutations are distributed throughout the gene. The majority of activating mutations cluster in a discrete region of the protein termed the allosteric activator site. The identification of a GCK mutation in patients with both hyper- and hypoglycemia has implications for the clinical course and clinical management of their disorder.",4 0
"Identification and characterization of aberrant GAA pre-mRNA splicing in pompe disease using a generic approach. || Adolescent Adult Child Exons Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Introns Middle Aged Mutation RNA Splicing RNA, Messenger Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction alpha-Glucosidases || Identification of pathogenic variants in monogenic diseases is an important aspect of diagnosis, genetic counseling, and prediction of disease severity. Pathogenic mechanisms involved include changes in gene expression, RNA processing, and protein translation. Variants affecting pre-mRNA splicing are difficult to predict due to the complex mechanism of splicing regulation. A generic approach to systematically detect and characterize effects of sequence variants on splicing would improve current diagnostic practice. Here, it is shown that such approach is feasible by combining flanking exon RT-PCR, sequence analysis of PCR products, and exon-internal quantitative RT-PCR for all coding exons. Application of this approach to one novel and six previously published variants in the acid-alpha glucosidase (GAA) gene causing Pompe disease enabled detection of a total of 11 novel splicing events. Aberrant splicing included cryptic splice-site usage, intron retention, and exon skipping. Importantly, the extent of leaky wild-type splicing correlated with disease onset and severity. These results indicate that this approach enables sensitive detection and in-depth characterization of variants affecting splicing, many of which are still unrecognized or poorly understood. The approach is generic and should be adaptable for application to other monogenic diseases to aid in improved diagnostics.",3 1 4 0
"Genetic screening protocol for familial hypercholesterolemia which includes splicing defects gives an improved mutation detection rate. || Apolipoproteins B Base Sequence Exons Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Introns Molecular Sequence Data RNA Splice Sites Receptors, LDL Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a common single gene disorder, which predisposes to coronary artery disease. In a previous study, we have shown that in patients with definite FH around 20% had no identifiable gene defect after screening the entire exon coding area of the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and testing for the common Apolipoprotein B (ApoB) R3500Q mutation. In this study, we have extended the screen to additional families and have included the non-coding intron splice regions of the gene. In families with definite FH (tendon xanthoma present, n=68) the improved genetic screening protocol increased the detection rate of mutations to 87%. This high detection rate greatly enhances the potential value of this test as part of a clinical screening program for FH. In contrast, the use of a limited screen in patients with possible FH (n=130) resulted in a detection rate of 26%, but this is still of significant benefit in diagnosis of this genetic condition. We have also shown that 14% of LDLR defects are due to splice site mutations and that the most frequent splice mutation in our series (c.1845+11 c>g) is expressed at the RNA level. In addition, DNA samples from the patients in whom no LDLR or ApoB gene mutations were found, were sequenced for the NARC-1 gene. No mutations were identified which suggests that the role of NARC-1 in causing FH is minor. In a small proportion of families (<10%) the genetic cause of the high cholesterol remains unknown, and other genes are still to be identified that could cause the clinical phenotype FH.",4
"PTPN11 mutations in Noonan syndrome: molecular spectrum, genotype-phenotype correlation, and phenotypic heterogeneity. || Buffers Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Female Genetic Heterogeneity Genetic Variation Genotype Humans Introns Male Models, Molecular Mutation Noonan Syndrome Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Protein Conformation Protein Phosphatase 2 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Temperature || Noonan syndrome (NS) is a developmental disorder characterized by facial dysmorphia, short stature, cardiac defects, and skeletal malformations. We recently demonstrated that mutations in PTPN11, the gene encoding the non-receptor-type protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 (src homology region 2-domain phosphatase-2), cause NS, accounting for approximately 50% of cases of this genetically heterogeneous disorder in a small cohort. All mutations were missense changes and clustered at the interacting portions of the amino-terminal src-homology 2 (N-SH2) and protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) domains. A gain of function was postulated as a mechanism for the disease. Here, we report the spectrum and distribution of PTPN11 mutations in a large, well-characterized cohort with NS. Mutations were found in 54 of 119 (45%) unrelated individuals with sporadic or familial NS. There was a significantly higher prevalence of mutations among familial cases than among sporadic ones. All defects were missense, and several were recurrent. The vast majority of mutations altered amino acid residues located in or around the interacting surfaces of the N-SH2 and PTP domains, but defects also affected residues in the C-SH2 domain, as well as in the peptide linking the N-SH2 and C-SH2 domains. Genotype-phenotype analysis revealed that pulmonic stenosis was more prevalent among the group of subjects with NS who had PTPN11 mutations than it was in the group without them (70.6% vs. 46.2%; P<.01), whereas hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was less prevalent among those with PTPN11 mutations (5.9% vs. 26.2%; P<.005). The prevalence of other congenital heart malformations, short stature, pectus deformity, cryptorchidism, and developmental delay did not differ between the two groups. A PTPN11 mutation was identified in a family inheriting Noonan-like/multiple giant-cell lesion syndrome, extending the phenotypic range of disease associated with this gene.",2 4
"Paternal bias in parental origin of HRAS mutations in Costello syndrome. ||  || Costello syndrome (CS) is a rare congenital condition caused by heterozygous de novo missense mutations affecting the codon for glycine 12 or 13 of the HRAS gene. We have identified 39 CS patients harboring the p.Gly12Ser mutation (NM_005343.2:c.34 G > A), two patients with c.35G > C mutations resulting in p.Gly12Ala substitutions, and one patient carrying the p.Gly13Cys substitution (c.37G > A). We analyzed the region flanking the mutated sites in 42 probands and 59 parents, and used four polymorphic markers to trace the parental origin of the germline mutations: one highly polymorphic hexanucleotide (GGGCCT) repeat region, defining three alleles with different numbers of repeat units (two, three, or four), and three SNPs. One of the SNPs, rs12628 (c.81T > C), was found in strong linkage disequilibrium with the hexanucleotide repeat region. Out of a total of 24 probands with polymorphic markers, 16 informative families were tested and the paternal origin of the germline mutation was found in 14 CS probands; a distribution that is neither consistent with an equal likelihood of mutations arising in either parent (P = 0.0018), nor with exclusive paternal origin.",4
"Alterations in RAS-MAPK genes in 200 Spanish patients with Noonan and other neuro-cardio-facio-cutaneous syndromes. Genotype and cardiopathy. || Adolescent Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Ectodermal Dysplasia Facies Failure to Thrive Female Genes, ras Genotype Heart Defects, Congenital Heart Diseases Humans Male Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases Noonan Syndrome Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-raf Pulmonary Valve Stenosis SOS1 Protein || Molecular characterization of congenital heart diseases now includes the not infrequent dysmorphic Noonan syndrome. A study of 6 genes of the RAS-MAPK pathway in Spanish patients is presented: the impact of heart disease, clinical expressivity, and diagnostic yield are investigated. The study included 643 patients (and 182 family members) diagnosed by dysmorphologists, cardiologists, and pediatric endocrinologists from 74 tertiary hospitals. Bidirectional sequencing analysis of PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, BRAF, KRAS and HRAS focused on exons carrying recurrent mutations accounting for 80% to 95% of previously described mutations. Mutations were detected in 230 patients (91 women and 139 men) in 200 (31%) families (172 PTPN11+, 14 SOS1+, 9 RAF1+, 5 BRAF+). There was specific reference to the heart defect suffered in 156 index cases: 103 patients had shown pulmonary stenosis, 12 pulmonary stenosis with hyperthrophic cardiomyopathy, 18 hypertrophic cardiomiopathy, and 14 other cardiopathies; heart disease was absent in 9 index cases. Heart disease had not been documented in 23 of 30 family members with positive genotype and compatible clinical signs. Diagnostic yield was higher (P=.016) for samples from some centers (53%; 14/32) and even from certain professionals (64%; 9/14; P=.019). Characterization rate was 18% in patients for whom clinical data were not available. Genotyping led to a more precise diagnosis in 26 patients. Most patients (94%) with a positive genotype had known congenital heart disease, 79% pulmonary stenosis and 12% hyperthrophic cardiomyopathy. Cardiopathy had not been documented in 76% of family members carrying the mutation. Molecular study is a useful tool in these syndromes but a more rigorous clinical diagnosis should be intended as well.",4
"The spectrum of vascular anomalies in patients with PTEN mutations: implications for diagnosis and management. || Adipose Tissue Adolescent Arteriovenous Fistula Blood Flow Velocity Blood Vessels Case Management Child Child, Preschool Female Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Head Hemangioma Humans Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Melanosis Middle Aged Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phenotype Retrospective Studies || Mutations in the PTEN gene cause two disorders that predispose to cancer, Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba and Cowden syndromes. Some patients with a PTEN mutation have only macrocephaly and autism, but they may still be at risk for neoplasms. Vascular anomalies occur in patients with a PTEN mutation, but they have not been systematically studied or precisely defined. We analysed the clinical and radiological features of the vascular anomalies in 26 patients with PTEN mutations who were either seen or had their medical records reviewed at Children's Hospital Boston. All 23 patients who had their head circumference measured were macrocephalic, and all 13 male patients who were fully examined had penile freckling. Vascular anomalies were found in 14/26 (54%) of patients: 8/14 (57%) had multiple lesions and 11/13 (85%) who had cross-sectional imaging had intramuscular vascular lesions. Radiographic studies showed that 12/14 (86%) were fast-flow vascular anomalies, and angiography typically showed focal segmental dilatation of draining veins. Excessive ectopic fat in the vascular anomalies was present in 11/12 (92%) of patients on CT or MRI. Intracranial developmental venous anomalies (DVAs) were found in 8/9 (89%) of patients who had brain MRI with contrast. Vascular anomalies in patients with a PTEN mutation are typically multifocal intramuscular combinations of fast-flow channels and ectopic fat. Cerebral DVAs are very common. PTEN mutational analysis should be considered for all macrocephalic patients with fast-flow vascular anomalies or multiple intracranial DVAs.",3 4
"DNA sequence analysis of GJB2, encoding connexin 26: observations from a population of hearing impaired cases and variable carrier rates, complex genotypes, and ethnic stratification of alleles among controls. || Alleles Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Case-Control Studies Cohort Studies Connexin 26 Connexins DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Ethnic Groups Female Gene Frequency Genetic Variation Genotype Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Heterozygote Humans Male Mutation Mutation, Missense Sequence Analysis, DNA || Mutations in GJB2 are associated with hereditary hearing loss. DNA sequencing of GJB2 in a cohort of hearing impaired patients and a multi-ethnic control group is reported. Among 610 hearing impaired cases, 43 DNA sequence variations were identified in the coding region of GJB2 including 24 mutations, 8 polymorphisms, 3 unclassified variants (G4D, R127C, M163V), 1 controversial variant (V37I), and 7 novel variants (G12C, N14D, V63A, T86M, L132V, D159, 592_600delinsCAGTGTTCATGACATTC). Sixteen non-coding sequence variations were also identified among cases including the IVS1+1A>G mutation, 2 polymorphisms, and 13 novel variants. A diagnosis of GJB2-associated hearing loss was confirmed for 63 cases (10.3%). Heterozygous mutations were found in 39 cases (6.4%). Eleven cases carrying novel or unclassified variants (1.8 %) and 18 cases carrying the controversial V37I variant were identified (3%). In addition, 294 control subjects from 4 ethnic groups were sequenced for GJB2. Thirteen sequence variations in the coding region of GJB2 were identified among controls including 2 mutations, 6 polymorphisms, 2 unclassified variants (G4D, T123N), 1 controversial variant (V37I), and 2 novel variants (R127L, V207L). Nine sequence variations were identified among controls in the non-coding regions in and around GJB2 exon 2. Of particular interest among controls were the variability in carrier rates and ethnic stratification of alleles, and the complex genotypes among Asians, 47% of whom carried two to four sequence variations in the coding region of GJB2. These data provide new information about carrier rates for GJB2-based hearing loss in various ethnic groups and contribute to evaluation of the pathogenicity of the controversial V37I variant.",4
"Patient Outcomes From a Specialized Inherited Arrhythmia Clinic. || Adult Aged Arrhythmias, Cardiac Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy Female Hospitals, Special Humans Male Middle Aged Morbidity Ontario Primary Prevention Retrospective Studies Risk Assessment Risk Factors Treatment Outcome || Patients with inherited arrhythmia syndromes are at an increased risk of sudden cardiac death (SCD). Specialized inherited arrhythmia clinics were founded to optimize management and prevention of SCD in this population. However, the clinical effectiveness of these clinics has never been evaluated. Clinical outcome data of patients referred to a specialized inherited arrhythmia clinic between 2005 and 2014 for a possible primary electric syndrome or arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy were analyzed. Of 720 patients evaluated, 278 received a definite or probable diagnosis and received long-term management in the inherited arrhythmia clinic. All patients diagnosed with long QT syndrome and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia received routine β-blocker therapy and demonstrated >90% long-term compliance. In patients with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, those demonstrating an arrhythmia burden on Holter or treadmill testing received β-blocker therapy (17%). In diagnosed channelopathy or arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy index cases, 44 patients received secondary prevention implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (long QT syndrome, 9; Brugada syndrome, 8; catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, 3; short QT syndrome, 1; and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, 23). Median follow-up was 4.1 years with 43% having a follow-up period of >5 years. SCD occurred in a single patient (annualized risk of SCD, 0.1% per year). In individuals determined to have clinical or genetic disease by cascade screening, no SCD has occurred over a median follow-up of 5.6 years (55%, >5 years). Low event rates occurred despite a low rate (4.0%) of primary prevention implantable cardioverter-defibrillator utilization. Longitudinal care in a specialized inherited arrhythmia clinic is associated with a low incidence of SCD and a low rate of primary implantable cardioverter-defibrillator utilization in patients with inherited arrhythmia syndromes.",4
"Germline PTEN mutations are rare and highly penetrant. ||  || Cowden syndrome (multiple hamartoma syndrome, MIM 158350) is an early onset syndrome characterized by multiple hamartomas in the skin, mucous membranes, breast, thyroid and endometrium. Patients with Cowden syndrome have increased risk of breast cancer, thyroid cancer and endometrial cancer. In 1997 germline mutations in PTEN were demonstrated to cause Cowden syndrome. We report the results of diagnostic and predictive testing in all families with Cowden syndrome or suspected Cowden syndrome registered at the Norwegian cancer family clinics. PTEN mutations were found in all six families meeting the clinical criteria for Cowden syndrome, in none of the two families assumed to have Cowden syndrome but not fulfilling the criteria, and in none of the eight families selected in our computerized medical files to have a combination of breast and thyroid cancers. Age-related penetrances for the various neoplasms are given. All families but one were small and de novo mutations were found.",3 4
"Fabry disease and multiple sclerosis misdiagnosis: the role of family history and neurological signs. ||  || Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked inherited lysosomal storage disorder caused by α galactosidase A (α-gal A) deficiency. Central nervous system involvement and chronic white matter lesions are observed in both FD and multiple sclerosis (MS), which can confound the differential diagnosis. We analyzed the GLA gene, which encodes α-gal A, in 86 patients with clinical and neuroradiological findings consistent with MS to determine whether they had FD. We identified four women initially diagnosed with MS who hadGLA mutations associated with FD. Our results indicate that family history besides neurological findings should be evaluated in patients with an uncertain diagnosis of MS. Also the involvement of organs outside the central nervous system can support the FD diagnosis.",3 4
"Identification of mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha gene in Japanese subjects with IDDM. || Adolescent Adult Animals Autoantibodies Binding Sites Child Child, Preschool DNA DNA-Binding Proteins Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Frameshift Mutation Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta Humans Infant Japan Mice Mutation Nuclear Proteins Pedigree Polymerase Chain Reaction Transcription Factors || One form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young, MODY3, is characterized by a severe insulin secretory defect, compared with MODY2, a glucokinase-deficient diabetes. It has recently been shown that mutations of the gene encoding the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha cause MODY3. Because of the rapid progress to overt diabetes and the high prevalence of required insulin treatment in patients with MODY3, we screened the HNF-1 alpha gene for mutations in Japanese subjects with IDDM. Ten exons and flanking introns of the HNF-1 alpha gene in these subjects were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing of the products. Mutations were identified in three (5.5%) of the 55 unrelated subjects with IDDM. A missense mutation of R272H (replacement of Arg by His in codon 272) in the DNA binding domain of HNF-1 alpha was found in a subject who developed IDDM 1 year after diagnosis of NIDDM at 8 years of age. A frameshift mutation of P291 fsinsC (insertion of a C in a polyC tract around codon 291 for Pro), which would generate a mutant truncated protein of 340 amino acids, was found in a subject who started insulin treatment when hyperglycemia and ketonuria were noticed at 13 years of age. A missense mutation of R583G (replacement of Arg by Gly in codon 583) in the transactivation domain of HNF-1 alpha was found in a subject with sudden-onset IDDM at 20 years of age. None of these mutations were present in 100 nondiabetic subjects (200 normal chromosomes). These results indicate that the HNF-1 alpha gene defects could lead to the development of not only early-onset NIDDM but also IDDM, implicating the importance of subclassification of HNF-1 alpha-deficient IDDM from a classical type of autoimmune-based IDDM in Japanese.",4
"Familial hypercholesterolemia in China. Identification of mutations in the LDL-receptor gene that result in a receptor-negative phenotype. || Adolescent Adult Base Sequence Binding Sites Blotting, Southern Child China Codon Coronary Disease Female Gene Deletion Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Point Mutation Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Receptors, LDL || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), caused by many different mutations in the low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-receptor gene, invariably leads to severe premature coronary heart disease (CHD) in homozygous individuals. Heterozygous FH patients are less severely affected but are still at increased risk of CHD in most populations. Although FH homozygotes in China are affected similarly to those elsewhere, heterozygotes are not detected in the general population and obligate heterozygotes are often not hypercholesterolemic by Western standards. Mutations in the LDL-receptor genes of 10 homozygous FH patients from the Jiang-su province of China and their heterozygous parents were analyzed. These include one large and two minor deletions and eight point mutations: four are predicted to introduce a premature stop codon, five to result in a single amino acid substitution or deletion, and one to produce a protein with an abnormal cytoplasmic tail. Expression of the mutant LDL-receptor cDNAs in vitro confirmed that these mutations impaired LDL-receptor function and that several would cause a receptor-negative phenotype. Thus, the lack of clinical expression in obligate FH heterozygotes is not due to unusually ""mild"" mutations in the LDL-receptor gene, and other genetic or environmental factors must therefore be important in determining phenotypic expression.",4 0
"Mutations in the ABCC8 gene can cause autoantibody-negative insulin-dependent diabetes. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Adolescent Adult Autoantibodies Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1 Female Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Humans Infant, Newborn Infant, Newborn, Diseases Male Middle Aged Mutation Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Receptors, Drug Sulfonylurea Receptors || Activating mutations in genes KCNJ11 and ABCC8, which form the ATP-sensitive K+channel (K(ATP) channel), have been shown to cause transient or permanent neonatal diabetes. We describe here a rather different phenotype: two cases of adult diabetic patients-considered and treated as insulin-dependent diabetic patients since adolescence-who, in fact, turned out to be heterozygous for an ABCC8 mutation and able to successfully discontinue insulin while taking sulphonylurea treatment.",4
"A novel mutation of the beta myosin heavy chain gene responsible for familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. ||  || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common inherited cardiac disorder and shows high variability in genetic heterogeneity and phenotypic characteristics. The genetic etiology responsible for HCM in many individuals remains unclear. This instigation was sought to identify novel genetic determinants for familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Six unrelated Chinese families with HCM were studied. For each of the 13 established HCM-susceptibility genes, 3 to 5 microsatellite markers were selected to perform genotyping and haplotype analysis. The linked genes were sequenced. Haplotype analyses on candidate genetic loci revealed cosegregation of the gene beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH7) with HCM in a single family. A novel double heterozygous missense mutation of Ala26Val plus Arg719Trp in MYH7 was subsequently identified by sequencing in this family and was associated with a severe phenotype of HCM. The novel double mutation of Ala26Val plus Arg719Trp in MYH7 identified in a Chinese family highlights the remarkable genetic heterogeneity of HCM, which provides important information for genetic counseling, accurate diagnosis, prognostic evaluation, and appropriate clinical management.",4
"Impact of multiple gene mutations in determining the severity of cardiomyopathy and heart failure. || Animals Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Heart Failure Humans Mutation Severity of Illness Index || 1. Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) is a primary cardiac disorder characterized by myocardial hypertrophy that demonstrates substantial diversity in both genetic causes and clinical manifestations. 2. Clinical heterogeneity can be explained by the causative gene (at least 13 have been identified to date), the position of the amino acid residue affected by a mutation within the protein (over 450 mutations have been reported to date) and modifying genetic and environmental factors. 3. Multiple mutations are found in up to 5% of human FHC cases, who typically present with a more severe phenotype compared with single-mutation carriers (i.e. earlier onset of disease, greater left ventricular hypertrophy and a higher incidence of sudden cardiac death events). 4. Multiple mutations usually involve MYH7, MYBPC3 and, to a lesser extent, TNNI2, reflecting the higher contribution of mutations in these genes to FHC. 5. Multiple-mutation mouse models appear to mimic the human multiple-mutation phenotype and, thus, will help improve our understanding of disease pathogenesis. The models provide a tool for future studies of disease mechanisms and signalling pathways in FHC and its sequelae (i.e. heart failure and sudden death), thereby allowing identification of novel targets for potential therapies and disease prevention strategies.",4
"Next generation sequencing based identification of disease-associated mutations in Swiss patients with retinal dystrophies. || Eye Proteins Female High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Receptors, Virus Retinal Dystrophies Switzerland Whole Exome Sequencing || Inherited monogenic diseases of the retina and vitreous affect approximately 1 in 2000 individuals. They are characterized by tremendous genetic heterogeneity and clinical variability involving mutations in approximately 250 genes and more than 20 different clinical phenotypes. Clinical manifestations of retinal dystrophies (RDs) range from mild retinal dysfunctions to severe congenital forms of blindness. A detailed clinical diagnosis and the identification of causative mutations are crucial for genetic counseling of affected patients and their families, for understanding genotype-phenotype correlations and developing therapeutic approaches. Using whole exome sequencing (WES) we have established a reliable and efficient high-throughput analysis pipeline to identify disease-causing mutations. Our data indicate that this approach enables us to genetically diagnose approximately 64% of the patients (n = 58) with variant(s) in known disease-associated genes. We report 20 novel and 26 recurrent variants in genes associated with RDs. We also identified a novel phenotype for mutations in C2orf71 and provide functional evidence for exon skipping due to a splice-site variant identified in FLVCR1. In conclusion, WES can rapidly identify variants in various families affected with different forms of RDs. Our study also expands the clinical and allelic spectrum of genes associated with RDs in the Swiss population.",4
"Multiplex ARMS analysis to detect 13 common mutations in familial hypercholesterolaemia. || Adolescent Adult Apolipoproteins B Child Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Frequency Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Receptors, LDL Reproducibility of Results Sensitivity and Specificity Serine Endopeptidases || DNA analysis and mutation identification is useful for the diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH), particularly in the young and in other situations where clinical diagnosis may be difficult, and enables unambiguous identification of at-risk relatives. Mutation screening of the whole of the three FH-causing genes is costly and time consuming. We have tested the specificity and sensitivity of a recently developed multiplex amplification refractory mutation system assay of 11 low-density lipoprotein receptor gene (LDLR) mutations, one APOB (p.R3527Q) and one PCSK9 (p.D374Y) mutation in 400 patients attending 10 UK lipid clinics. The kit detected a mutation in 54 (14%) patients, and a complete screen of the LDLR gene using single-stranded conformation polymorphism/denaturing high performance liquid chromatography identified 59 different mutations (11 novel) in an additional 87 patients, for an overall detection rate of 35%. The kit correctly identified 38% of all detected mutations by the full screen, with no false-positive or false-negative results. In the patients with a clinical diagnosis of definite FH, the overall detection rate was higher (54/110 = 49%), with the kit detecting 52% of the full-screen mutations. Results can be obtained within a week of sample receipt, and the high detection rate and good specificity make this a useful initial DNA diagnostic test for UK patients.",4
"Low-density lipoprotein receptor gene mutations in a Southeast Asian population with familial hypercholesterolemia. || Adult Aged Apolipoproteins B Asia, Southeastern DNA Primers Electrophoresis, Agar Gel Female Genotype Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Lipoproteins Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction Receptors, LDL Sequence Analysis, DNA || The aim of this study was to detect mutations in the genes coding for the low-density lipoprotein receptor and apolipoprotein B in patients of Southeast Asian origin with clinically diagnosed familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) and to relate these findings with the observed lower incidence of coronary heart disease in this part of the world. A total of 86 unrelated patients with FH were selected on clinical grounds, and complete DNA analysis of the low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-receptor and apolipoprotein B (apoB) genes by DGGE and DNA-sequencing was performed. In the majority (73%) of the cohort studied, no mutations could be detected, even after extensive analysis of the LDL-receptor and apoB genes. However, the 22 patients with a mutation had significantly more xanthomas and a higher incidence of coronary heart disease and levels of low-density lipoproteins were also significantly different. There was no correlation between the type of the mutation and lipoprotein levels or clinical signs of atherosclerosis. The fact that the majority of the FH patients studied had no detectable mutation and that this group had a significant milder phenotype, suggests the presence of a third gene in the Southeast Asian population, predominantly leading to a disorder resembling a milder form of FH. A similar, but less frequent, trait has recently been described in a number of European families.",4
"Clinical and functional characterization of the CDH1 germline variant c.1679C>G in three unrelated families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. ||  || Germline changes in the CDH1 tumor suppressor gene predispose to diffuse gastric cancer and lobular breast cancer. In carriers of deleterious germline CDH1 variants, prophylactic gastrectomy is recommended. In case of germline missense variants, it is mandatory to assess the functional impact on E-cadherin, the protein encoded by CDH1, and to predict their clinical significance. Herein, we have identified a recurrent germline missense variant, c.1679C>G, segregating with gastric cancer in three unrelated Spanish families. Through genetic, transcriptional, in silico and in vitro studies, we demonstrate the deleterious effect of the c.1679C>G variant and its association with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer, providing relevant data to relatives and allowing an accurate genetic counseling.",2 4
"Spectrum of LDL receptor gene mutations in Denmark: implications for molecular diagnostic strategy in heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. || Adolescent Adult Blotting, Southern DNA DNA Primers Denmark Exons Female Gene Rearrangement Genetic Markers Heterozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational RNA, Messenger Receptors, LDL || Heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is one of the most common potentially fatal single-gene diseases leading to premature coronary artery disease, but the majority of heterozygous FH patients have not been diagnosed. FH is due to mutations in the gene coding for the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor, and molecular genetic diagnosis may facilitate identification of more FH subjects. The Danish spectrum of 29 different mutations, five of which account for almost half of heterozygous FH, is intermediate between that of countries such as South Africa, where three mutations cause 95% of heterozygous FH in the Afrikaners, and Germany or England, where there are many more mutations. In clinical practice, a strategy for the genetic diagnosis of heterozygous FH, tailored to the mutational spectrum of patients likely to be seen at the particular hospital/region of the country, will be more efficient than screening of the whole LDL receptor gene by techniques such as single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis in every heterozygous FH candidate. In Aarhus, Denmark, we have chosen to examine all heterozygous FH candidates for the five most common LDL receptor gene mutations (W23X, W66G, W556S, 313 + 1G --> A, 1846 - 1G --> A) and the apoB-3500 mutation by rapid restriction fragment analysis. Negative samples are examined for other mutations by SSCP analysis followed by DNA sequencing of the exon indicated by SSCP to contain a mutation. If no point mutation or small insertion/deletion is detected, Southern blot or Long PCR analysis is performed to look for the presence of large gene rearrangements. In conclusion, our data suggest that an efficient molecular diagnostic strategy depends on the composition of common and rare mutations in a population.",4
"Genetic heterogeneity in familial juvenile polyposis. || Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Base Sequence Child Cloning, Molecular Diseases in Twins Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel Exons Family Health Female Gene Deletion Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases RNA, Messenger Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Sequence Analysis, DNA Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS) is an autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by multiple gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyps in the absence of the extraintestinal features that are classic for other hamartomatous polyposis syndromes, such as Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS) and Cowden disease (CD). About 50% of BRRS and >80% of CD demonstrate germ-line mutations in the tumor suppressor and dual phosphatase, PTEN. Germ-line mutation of PTEN as a cause for JPS in a child is controversial because extraintestinal manifestations that would exclude JPS could appear after adolescence, altering the clinical diagnosis. Here, we investigated a family in which the 55-year-old father, who lacks thyroid or skin findings characteristic of CD, demonstrated a germ-line mutation in PTEN that was passed to identical twin daughters, who both manifested JPS. The mutation was a deletion of five bases beginning seven bases from the start of exon 4 of PTEN, which caused aberrant transcripts by reverse transcription-PCR that were absent from a normal individual. Thus, mutations in PTEN are associated with JPS in addition to CD and some BRRS families, although the incidence of PTEN germ-line mutations in JPS might be more rare than that reported for SMAD4, a gene found to be mutated in approximately one-half of the JPS families investigated.",4
"Rapid progressive course of later-onset Pompe disease in Chinese patients. || Adolescent Adult Asian Continental Ancestry Group Enzyme Replacement Therapy Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Point Mutation Respiration, Artificial Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Taiwan Treatment Outcome alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease presents with a wide variety of phenotypes ranging from a fatal disease in infancy (the infantile-onset form) to other milder later-onset forms. Currently, the clinical manifestations in Chinese patients with later-onset Pompe disease are still not well understood. Fifteen Chinese patients who were clinically diagnosed with Pompe disease at later than one year of age at the National Taiwan University Hospital from 1993 to 2009 were included in this study. Confirmatory diagnosis included both biochemical and molecular tests. Patient outcomes after recombinant human acid α-glucosidase (GAA) therapy were also evaluated by assessing the percentage of predicted forced vital capacity in the upright position, hours of daily ventilator use, and the functional status change using Walton Gardner Medwin Scale. The median age at symptom onset was 15 (12-35)years, and the median age at diagnosis was 21 (10-38)years. At the time of diagnosis or shortly after, 8 patients (53%) required mechanical ventilation. A quadriceps muscle biopsy from a 13-year-old boy already showed extensive glycogen storage and muscle fiber destruction. Mutation analysis revealed that the two dual mutations in the GAA gene c.[1935C>A; 1726G>A] (p.[D645E; G576S]) and c.[2238G>C; 1726G>A] (p.[W746C; G576S]) represented 66.5% of the mutated chromosomes. Using mutagenesis, we showed that the p.G576S pseudodeficiency mutation significantly decreased the residual enzyme activity of p.W746C. Most patients responded poorly to recombinant human GAA. Chinese patients with later-onset Pompe disease often showed onset of symptoms in their second decade of life with rapid disease progression, which is probably due to a specific pattern of GAA gene mutation. Therefore, early diagnosis and early treatment would be necessary to improve the prognosis of these patients.",3 1 4 0
"Frequent gastrointestinal polyps and colorectal adenocarcinomas in a prospective series of PTEN mutation carriers. || Adenocarcinoma Adolescent Adult Aged Child Child, Preschool Colorectal Neoplasms Endoscopy, Gastrointestinal Female Gene Deletion Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Infant Intestinal Polyps Male Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phenotype Point Mutation Risk Factors Young Adult || Germline phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) mutations cause Cowden syndrome (CS), associated with breast and thyroid cancers. Case reports found 35%-85% of CS patients had gastrointestinal (GI) hamartomas. The association of benign and malignant GI neoplasias with CS remains debatable. Our goal is to describe the GI phenotype in a prospective series of PTEN mutation carriers. Patients who met relaxed International Cowden Consortium criteria (N = 2548) or with 5 or more GI polyps, 1 or more of which was hyperplastic or hamartomatous (N = 397), were prospectively recruited. Germline PTEN mutation/deletion analysis was performed. Of the 2945 patients, 127 (123 of 2548 and 4 of 397, respectively) patients having clear pathogenic PTEN mutations were eligible for this study. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, colonoscopy, and pathology reports were reviewed. The Fisher 2-tailed exact test, unpaired t tests, and age- and sex-adjusted standardized incidence ratio were calculated. Of 127 PTEN mutation carriers, 69 underwent 1 or more endoscopies with 64 (93%) having polyps. Of the 64, half had hyperplastic polyps. There were one to innumerable polyps in the colorectum, ileum, duodenum, stomach, and/or esophagus, with 24 subjects having both upper and lower GI polyps. Nine (13%) subjects had colorectal cancer, all younger than the age of 50. The adjusted standardized incidence ratio was 224.1 (95% confidence interval, 109.3-411.3; P < .0001). PTEN-associated CS should be considered a mixed polyp syndrome, with hyperplastic polyps most prevalent, with a risk of early onset colorectal cancer. Routine colonoscopy should be considered in PTEN-associated CS, especially in the context of hyperplastic and/or adenomatous polyps.",3 4
"Unexpectedly low mutation rates in beta-myosin heavy chain and cardiac myosin binding protein genes in Italian patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adult Aged Base Sequence Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Chest Pain Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Electrocardiography Female Humans Italy Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Sarcomeres || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common genetic cardiac disease. Fourteen sarcomeric and sarcomere-related genes have been implicated in HCM etiology, those encoding β-myosin heavy chain (MYH7) and cardiac myosin binding protein C (MYBPC3) reported as the most frequently mutated: in fact, these account for around 50% of all cases related to sarcomeric gene mutations, which are collectively responsible for approximately 70% of all HCM cases. Here, we used denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography followed by bidirectional sequencing to screen the coding regions of MYH7 and MYBPC3 in a cohort (n = 125) of Italian patients presenting with HCM. We found 6 MHY7 mutations in 9/125 patients and 18 MYBPC3 mutations in 19/125 patients. Of the three novel MYH7 mutations found, two were missense, and one was a silent mutation; of the eight novel MYBPC3 mutations, one was a substitution, three were stop codons, and four were missense mutations. Thus, our cohort of Italian HCM patients did not harbor the high frequency of mutations usually found in MYH7 and MYBPC3. This finding, coupled to the clinical diversity of our cohort, emphasizes the complexity of HCM and the need for more inclusive investigative approaches in order to fully understand the pathogenesis of this disease.",4
"Germline multi-gene hereditary cancer panel testing in an unselected endometrial cancer cohort. || Aged DNA Mutational Analysis Endometrial Neoplasms Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Humans Middle Aged || Hereditary endometrial carcinoma is associated with germline mutations in Lynch syndrome genes. The role of other cancer predisposition genes is unclear. We aimed to determine the prevalence of cancer predisposition gene mutations in an unselected endometrial carcinoma patient cohort. Mutations in 25 genes were identified using a next-generation sequencing-based panel applied in 381 endometrial carcinoma patients who had undergone tumor testing to screen for Lynch syndrome. Thirty-five patients (9.2%) had a deleterious mutation: 22 (5.8%) in Lynch syndrome genes (three MLH1, five MSH2, two EPCAM-MSH2, six MSH6, and six PMS2) and 13 (3.4%) in 10 non-Lynch syndrome genes (four CHEK2, one each in APC, ATM, BARD1, BRCA1, BRCA2, BRIP1, NBN, PTEN, and RAD51C). Of 21 patients with deleterious mutations in Lynch syndrome genes with tumor testing, 2 (9.5%) had tumor testing results suggestive of sporadic cancer. Of 12 patients with deleterious mutations in MSH6 and PMS2, 10 were diagnosed at age >50 and 8 did not have a family history of Lynch syndrome-associated cancers. Patients with deleterious mutations in non-Lynch syndrome genes were more likely to have serous tumor histology (23.1 vs 6.4%, P=0.02). The three patients with non-Lynch syndrome deleterious mutations and serous histology had mutations in BRCA2, BRIP1, and RAD51C. Current clinical criteria fail to identify a portion of actionable mutations in Lynch syndrome and other hereditary cancer syndromes. Performance characteristics of tumor testing are sufficiently robust to implement universal tumor testing to identify patients with Lynch syndrome. Germline multi-gene panel testing is feasible and informative, leading to the identification of additional actionable mutations.",4
"Founder and recurrent CDH1 mutations in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. ||  || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer is caused by germline mutations in the epithelial cadherin (CDH1) gene and is characterized by an increased risk for diffuse gastric cancer and lobular breast cancer. To determine whether recurring germline CDH1 mutations occurred due to independent mutational events or common ancestry. Thirty-eight families diagnosed clinically with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer were accrued between November 2004 and January 2006 and were analyzed for CDH1 mutations as part of an ongoing study at the British Columbia Cancer Agency. Twenty-six families had at least 2 gastric cancer cases with 1 case of diffuse gastric cancer in a person younger than 50 years; 12 families had either a single case of diffuse gastric cancer diagnosed in a person younger than 35 years or multiple cases of diffuse gastric cancer diagnosed in persons older than 50 years. Classification of family members as carriers or noncarriers of CDH1 mutations. Haplotype analysis to assess recurring mutations for common ancestry was performed on 7 families from this study and 7 previously reported families with the same mutations. Thirteen mutations (6 novel) were identified in 15 of the 38 families (40% detection rate). The 1137G>A splicing mutation and the 1901C>T (A634V) missense/splicing mutation occurred on common haplotypes in 2 families but on different haplotypes in a third family. The 2195G>A (R732Q) missense/splicing mutation occurred in 2 families on different haplotypes. The 2064-2065delTG mutation occurred on a common haplotype in 2 families. Two families from this study plus 2 additional families carrying the novel 2398delC mutation shared a common haplotype, suggesting a founder effect. All 4 families originate from the southeast coast of Newfoundland. Due to concentrations of lobular breast cancer cases, 2 branches of this family had been diagnosed as having hereditary breast cancer and were tested for BRCA mutations. Within these 4 families, the cumulative risk by age 75 years in mutation carriers for clinically detected gastric cancer was 40% (95% confidence interval [CI], 12%-91%) for males and 63% (95% CI, 19%-99%) for females and the risk for breast cancer in female mutation carriers was 52% (95% CI, 29%-94%). Recurrent CDH1 mutations in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer are due to both independent mutational events and common ancestry. The presence of a founder mutation from Newfoundland is strongly supported.",2 4 0 3
"Pathology and function of conduction tissue in Fabry disease cardiomyopathy. || Cardiomyopathies Electrocardiography Electrophysiologic Techniques, Cardiac Fabry Disease Female Heart Atria Heart Conduction System Heart Rate Humans Male Microscopy, Electron Middle Aged Myocardium Retrospective Studies Ventricular Function || Cardiac arrhythmias are common in Fabry disease (FD) and may occur in prehypertrophic cardiomyopathy suggesting an early compromise of conduction tissue (CT). Therefore, FD X-linked and CT may be variously involved in male and female patients with FD cardiomyopathy, affecting CT function. Among 74 patients with endomyocardial biopsy diagnosis of FD cardiomyopathy, 13 (6 men; 7 women; mean age, 50.1±13.5 years; maximal wall thickness, 16.7±3.7 mm) had CT included in histological specimens and 6 also at electron microscopy. CT glycolipid infiltration was defined as focal, moderate, extensive, or massive, if involved ≤30%, ≤50%, >50%, or 100% of cells; identified as loosely arranged small myocytes positive to HCN4 immunostaining, supplied by a centrally placed thick-walled arteriole. CT involvement was correlated with age, sex, and α-Gal gene mutation. CT function was evaluated by electrophysiological study and arrhythmias at Holter registration. CT infiltration was focal/moderate in 4 women with no arrhythmias and normal electrophysiological study, extensive in 3 women with atrial or ventricular arrhythmias and short HV interval, and massive in 6 men with atrial fibrillation or ventricular arrhythmias and short HV. Short PR/AH with increased refractoriness was additionally found in 3 patients with extensive/massive CT infiltration. A male patient with the shortest HV presented infra-Hissian block during decremental atrial stimulation. There was no correlation with age, maximal wall thickness, and type of gene mutation. CT infiltration in FD cardiomyopathy is constant in men and variable in women because of skewed X-chromosome inactivation; its extensive/massive involvement causes accelerated conduction with prolonged refractoriness and electric instability.",3 4
"Male-to-male transmission of Costello syndrome: G12S HRAS germline mutation inherited from a father with somatic mosaicism. || Alleles Child Fathers Genes, ras Germ-Line Mutation Humans Intellectual Disability Male Mosaicism Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras) Syndrome || Costello syndrome is a rare congenital anomaly syndrome associated with mental retardation and predisposition to benign and malignant tumors, caused by heterozygous missense mutations in the HRAS oncogene. Previously, all molecularly analyzed mutations appeared de novo, and most arose in the paternal germline. A single patient with somatic mosaicism for a Costello syndrome causing HRAS mutation has been reported. Here we describe the first documented transmission of an HRAS mutation from a parent with somatic mosaicism to a child with typical Costello syndrome. Prior to the identification of the underlying gene mutation in Costello syndrome, this family had been identified clinically. The proband was subsequently found to carry a G12S HRAS germline mutation. Testing of the parents for parental origin identified his father as mosaic for the same HRAS mutation. The mother was found not to carry an HRAS mutation. The causative familial mutation is identified as a c.34G > A, which is the most common mutation in the HRAS gene in patients with Costello syndrome. The father carries the mutation in 7-8% of his alleles. This is the second case of mosaicism observed in Costello syndrome and the first direct molecular evidence of father-to-son transmission of the disease-causing mutation. Our observation underlines the importance of parental evaluation, and may have implications for genetic counseling and clinical practice.",4
"Prevalence of mutations and functional analyses of melanocortin 4 receptor variants identified among 750 men with juvenile-onset obesity. || Adult Cohort Studies Humans Male Mutation Obesity Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 || Mutations in the gene encoding the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) are associated with the most common monogenic form of obesity. We examined 750 Danish men with juvenile-onset obesity (body mass index 33.3 +/- 2.4 kg/m(2)) and 706 control subjects (body mass index 21.4 +/- 2.1 kg/m(2)) for mutations in MC4R. A total of 14 different mutations were identified of which two, Ala219Val and Leu325Phe, were novel variants. The variant receptor, Leu325Phe, was unable to bind [Nle4,d-Phe7]-alphaMSH, whereas the Ala219Val variant showed a significantly impaired melanotan II induction of cAMP, compared with the wild-type receptor. The remaining 11 mutations have previously been reported, but selected MC4R variants were further characterized in vitro in the present study. A previously identified nonsense mutation, Tyr35stop, had a relatively high allele frequency (0.6%), suggesting a possible founder effect in the Danish population. This study shows a carrier frequency of 2.5% of pathogenic mutations in the MC4R gene in a population-based study of obese men. Thus, variation in this gene is the most common known specific genetic cause of obesity among Scandinavian men.",4 0
"Bone marrow pathologic abnormalities in familial platelet disorder with propensity for myeloid malignancy and germline RUNX1 mutation. || Biopsy Blood Platelet Disorders Bone Marrow Clonal Evolution Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA Mutational Analysis Disease Progression Disease Susceptibility Family Female Follow-Up Studies Germ-Line Mutation Humans Immunophenotyping Karyotyping Male Myeloproliferative Disorders Pedigree || A subset of patients with familial platelet disorder with propensity to myeloid malignancy and germline RUNX1 mutation develops hematological malignancies, often myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia, currently recognized in the 2016 WHO classification. Patients who develop hematologic malignancies are typically young, respond poorly to conventional therapy, and need allogeneic stem cell transplant from non-familial donors. Understanding the spectrum of bone marrow morphologic and genetic findings in these patients is critical to ensure diagnostic accuracy and develop criteria to recognize the onset of hematologic malignancies, particularly myelodysplastic syndrome. However, bone marrow features remain poorly characterized. To address this knowledge gap, we analyzed the clinicopathologic and genetic findings of 11 patients from 7 pedigrees. Of these, 6 patients did not develop hematologic malignancies over a 22-month follow-up period; 5 patients developed hematologic malignancies (3 acute myeloid leukemia; 2 myelodysplastic syndrome). All patients had thrombocytopenia at initial presentation. All 6 patients who did not develop hematologic malignancies showed baseline bone marrow abnormalities: low-for-age cellularity (n=4), dysmegakaryopoiesis (n=5), megakaryocytic hypoplasia/hyperplasia (n=5), and eosinophilia (n=4). Two patients had multiple immunophenotypic alterations in CD34-positive myeloblasts; 1 patient had clonal hematopoiesis. In contrast, patients who developed hematologic malignancies had additional cytopenia(s) (n=4), abnormal platelet granulation (n=5), bone marrow hypercellularity (n=4), dysplasia in ≥2 lineages including megakaryocytes (n=3) and acquired clonal genetic aberrations (n=5). In conclusion, our study demonstrated that specific bone marrow abnormalities and acquired genetic alterations may be harbingers of progression to hematological malignancies in patients with familial platelet disorder with germlineRUNX1 mutation.",4
"The origins of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-causing mutations in two South African subpopulations: a unique profile of both independent and founder events. || Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 Female Founder Effect Genotype Haplotypes Humans Male Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree South Africa Troponin T || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an autosomal dominantly inherited disease of the cardiac sarcomere, caused by numerous mutations in genes encoding protein components of this structure. Mutation carriers are at risk of sudden cardiac death, mostly as adolescents or young adults. The reproductive disadvantage incurred may explain both the global occurrence of diverse independent HCM-associated mutations and the rare reports of founder effects within populations. We have investigated whether this holds true for two South African subpopulations, one of mixed ancestry and one of northern-European descent. Previously, we had detected three novel mutations-Ala797Thr in the beta-myosin heavy-chain gene (betaMHC), Arg92Trp in the cardiac troponin T gene (cTnT), and Arg645His in the myosin-binding protein C gene (MyBPC)-and two documented betaMHC mutations (Arg403Trp and Arg249Gln). Here we report three additional novel mutations-Gln499Lys in betaMHC and Val896Met and Deltac756 in MyBPC-and the documented betaMHC Arg719Gln mutation. Seven of the nine HCM-causing mutations arose independently; no conclusions can be drawn for the remaining two. However, the betaMHC Arg403Trp and Ala797Thr and cTnT Arg92Trp mutations were detected in another one, eight, and four probands, respectively, and haplotype analysis in families carrying these recurring mutations inferred their origin from three common ancestors. The milder phenotype of the betaMHC mutations may account for the presence of these founder effects, whereas population dynamics alone may have overridden the reproductive disadvantage incurred by the more lethal, cTnT Arg92Trp mutation.",4
"PTPN11 mutations in patients with LEOPARD syndrome: a French multicentric experience. || Adolescent Adult Child DNA Mutational Analysis Female France Humans Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins LEOPARD Syndrome Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases || ",2 4
"High frequency of mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene in non-obese patients with diabetes of youth in Japanese and identification of a case of digenic inheritance. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Body Mass Index Body Weight Child DNA-Binding Proteins Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Gene Frequency Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta Humans Insulin Resistance Japan Male Mutation Nuclear Proteins Obesity Transcription Factors || There is an emerging epidemic of Type II (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus of youth in Japan and in many other developed countries. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene (TCF1) in a large group of Japanese patients with early-onset non-Type I (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus. Since approximately 20% of Caucasian patients with HNF-1alpha mutations have been shown to be obese or overweight, we also examined the association of genetic variations in TCF1 with body weight in Japanese subjects. We examined 203 patients with non-Type 1 diabetes who had been diagnosed before they reached 15 years of age. Ten exons and flanking introns of TCF1 of these patients were directly sequenced for mutations. We found 14 different mutations in 18 patients (8.9%), including one that was found to be de novo. The patients with the mutations had lower BMI (20.1+/-3.0 kg/m(2)) at diagnosis than the patients without them (24.5+/-6.0 kg/m(2)) (p=0.0024). All of the patients with the mutations, except for one, Y120, had normal body weight (BMI<25 kg/m(2)); the frequency of HNF-1alpha mutations in the non-obese patients of this study was 17% (17/101). Patient Y120, who had atypical symptoms of mild obesity and insulin resistance at diagnosis, was found to have inherited an additional mutation in an obesity-related gene. A considerable number of non-obese Japanese patients with non-Type 1 diabetes of youth have HNF-1alpha-deficient diabetes. Lack of obesity could well be a characteristic feature of this form of diabetes.",4
"Intronic mutations outside of Alu-repeat-rich domains of the LDL receptor gene are a cause of familial hypercholesterolemia. || Base Sequence DNA Primers Exons Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Introns Mutation Receptors, LDL Repetitive Sequences, Nucleic Acid || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), a frequent monogenic condition complicated by premature cardiovascular disease, is characterized by high allelic heterogeneity at the low-density lipoprotein receptor ( LDLR) locus. Despite more than a decade of genetic testing, knowledge about intronic disease-causing mutations has remained limited because of lack of available genomic sequences. Based on the finding from bioinformatic analysis that Alu repeats represent 85% of LDLR intronic sequences outside exon-intron junctions, we designed a strategy to improve the exploration of genomic regions in the vicinity of exons in 110 FH subjects from an admixed population. In the first group of 42 patients of negative mutation carriers, as previously established by former screening strategies (denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, DNA sequencing with former primers overlapping splice-sites, Southern Blotting), about half ( n=22) were found to be carriers of at least one heterozygous mutation. Among a second group of 68 newly recruited patients, 27% of mutation carriers ( n=37) had a splicing regulatory mutation. Overall, out of the 54 mutations identified, 13 were intronic, and 18 were novel, out of which nearly half were intronic. Two novel intronic mutations (IVS8-10G-->A within the polypyrimidine tract and IVS7+10G-->A downstream of donor site) might create potential aberrant splice sites according to neural-network computed estimation, contrary to 31 common single nucleotide variations also identified at exon-intron junctions. This new strategy of detecting the most likely disease-causing LDLR mutations outside of Alu-rich genomic regions reveals that intronic mutations may have a greater impact than previously reported on the molecular basis of FH.",4
"A common ancestor for COCH related cochleovestibular (DFNA9) patients in Belgium and The Netherlands bearing the P51S mutation. || Alleles Amino Acid Substitution Belgium Chromosomes, Artificial, Yeast Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 Cochlear Diseases Contig Mapping Extracellular Matrix Proteins Family Health Female Gene Frequency Haplotypes Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Microsatellite Repeats Netherlands Point Mutation Proteins Vestibular Diseases || ",3 4
"Vestibular deterioration precedes hearing deterioration in the P51S COCH mutation (DFNA9): an analysis in 74 mutation carriers. ||  || To analyze cochleovestibular impairment features in P51S COCH mutation carriers (n = 22) in a new, large Dutch family and to compare the results to those obtained in previously identified similar mutation carriers (n = 52). To evaluate age-related features between progressive hearing and vestibular impairment of all mutation carriers (n = 74). Family study. Regression analysis was performed in relation to age to outline the development of hearing thresholds, speech recognition scores, and vestibulo-ocular reflex time constant as the key vestibular response parameter. Pure tone thresholds, phoneme recognition scores, and vestibular responses of the mutation carriers in the new family were essentially similar to those previously established in all other mutation carriers. Hearing started to deteriorate in all mutation carriers from 43 years of age onwards, whereas deterioration of vestibular function started from age 34. Vestibular impairment starts earlier, progresses more rapidly, and, eventually, is more complete than hearing impairment in P51S COCH mutation carriers.",2 4
"Worse prognosis with gene mutations of beta-myosin heavy chain than myosin-binding protein C in Chinese patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. ||  || No data are available on survival analysis and longitudinal evolution of patients with gene mutations of beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH7) and myosin binding protein C (MYBPC3) in Chinese. To prospectively investigate whether different gene mutations confer distinct prognosis. We performed a prospective study in 70 HCM patients and 46 genetically affected family members without HCM-phenotype with direct DNA sequencing of MYH7 and MYBPC3, clinical assessments, and 5.8 +/- 1.8 years follow-up. After follow-up, more surgical intervention (8/52 versus 0/18, p < 0.001), higher sudden death risk (7/52 versus 0/18, p < 0.001) and shorter life span were found in patients with MYH7 mutations than in patients with MYBPC3 mutations (45.1 +/- 14.0 versus 73.5 +/- 7.5 years, p = 0.03). Seven of the 27 mutation carriers of MYH7 had clinical presentations of HCM, but no carriers of MYBPC3 mutations developed to HCM during follow-up. Maximal wall thickness was thicker in the patients carrying mutations in the global region of MYH7 than in those carrying mutations in the rod region of MYH7 (21.5 +/- 6.6 versus 15 +/- 6.1 mm, p < 0.05) at baseline. More sudden death (7/41 versus 0/11) and left ventricular dysfunction (NYHA Class III approximately IV, 17/32 versus 1/10) were identified in patients with mutations in the global region of MYH7 than in patients with other mutations. MYH7 mutations, especially in the global region, cause malignant clinical phenotypes.",4
"KLLN epigenotype-phenotype associations in Cowden syndrome. || DNA Methylation Epigenesis, Genetic Female Genetic Association Studies Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Promoter Regions, Genetic Thyroid Neoplasms Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Germline KLLN promoter hypermethylation was recently identified as a potential genetic etiology of the cancer predisposition syndrome, Cowden syndrome (CS), when no causal PTEN gene mutation was found. We screened for KLLN promoter methylation in a large prospective series of CS patients and determined the risk of benign and malignant CS features in patients with increased methylation both with and without a PTEN mutation/variant of unknown significance. In all, 1012 CS patients meeting relaxed International Cowden Consortium criteria including 261 PTEN mutation-positive CS patients, 187 PTEN variant-positive CS patients and 564 PTEN mutation-negative CS patients, as well as 111 population controls were assessed for germline KLLN promoter methylation by MassARRAY EpiTYPER analysis. KLLN promoter methylation was analyzed both as a continuous and a dichotomous variable in the calculation of phenotypic risks by stepwise logistic regression and Kaplan-Meier/standardized incidence ratio methods, respectively. Significantly increased KLLN promoter methylation was seen in CS individuals with and without a PTEN mutation/VUS compared with controls (P<0.001). Patients with high KLLN promoter methylation have increased risks of all CS-associated malignancies compared with the general population. Interestingly, KLLN-associated risk of thyroid cancer appears to be gender and PTEN status dependent. KLLN promoter methylation associated with different benign phenotypes dependent on PTEN status. Furthermore, increasing KLLN promoter methylation is associated with a greater phenotype burden in mutation-negative CS patients. Germline promoter hypermethylation of KLLN is associated with particular malignant and benign CS features, which is dependent on the PTEN mutation status.",3 4
"Heterozygous ABCC8 mutations are a cause of MODY. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Adult Amino Acid Substitution Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Genetic Association Studies Heterozygote Humans Hypoglycemic Agents Leukocytes Male Microsatellite Repeats Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Protein Subunits Receptors, Drug Sulfonylurea Compounds Sulfonylurea Receptors United Kingdom Young Adult || The ABCC8 gene encodes the sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1) subunit of the pancreatic beta cell ATP-sensitive potassium (K(ATP)) channel. Inactivating mutations cause congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) and activating mutations cause transient neonatal diabetes (TNDM) or permanent neonatal diabetes (PNDM) that can usually be treated with sulfonylureas. Sulfonylurea sensitivity is also a feature of HNF1A and HNF4A MODY, but patients referred for genetic testing with clinical features of these types of diabetes do not always have mutations in the HNF1A/4A genes. Our aim was to establish whether mutations in the ABCC8 gene cause MODY that is responsive to sulfonylurea therapy. We sequenced the ABCC8 gene in 85 patients with a BMI <30 kg/m², no family history of neonatal diabetes and who were deemed sensitive to sulfonylureas by the referring clinician or were sulfonylurea-treated. All had tested negative for mutations in the HNF1A and HNF4A genes. ABCC8 mutations were found in seven of the 85 (8%) probands. Four patients were heterozygous for previously reported mutations and four novel mutations, E100K, G214R, Q485R and N1245D, were identified. Only four probands fulfilled MODY criteria, with two diagnosed after 25 years and one patient, who had no family history of diabetes, as a result of a proven de novo mutation. ABCC8 mutations can cause MODY in patients whose clinical features are similar to those with HNF1A/4A MODY. Therefore, sequencing of ABCC8 in addition to the known MODY genes should be considered if such features are present, to facilitate optimal clinical management of these patients.",2 4
"Development of a genotyping microarray for Usher syndrome. || DNA DNA Primers Europe Genetic Variation Genotype Humans Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome, a combination of retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and sensorineural hearing loss with or without vestibular dysfunction, displays a high degree of clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Three clinical subtypes can be distinguished, based on the age of onset and severity of the hearing impairment, and the presence or absence of vestibular abnormalities. Thus far, eight genes have been implicated in the syndrome, together comprising 347 protein-coding exons. To improve DNA diagnostics for patients with Usher syndrome, we developed a genotyping microarray based on the arrayed primer extension (APEX) method. Allele-specific oligonucleotides corresponding to all 298 Usher syndrome-associated sequence variants known to date, 76 of which are novel, were arrayed. Approximately half of these variants were validated using original patient DNAs, which yielded an accuracy of >98%. The efficiency of the Usher genotyping microarray was tested using DNAs from 370 unrelated European and American patients with Usher syndrome. Sequence variants were identified in 64/140 (46%) patients with Usher syndrome type I, 45/189 (24%) patients with Usher syndrome type II, 6/21 (29%) patients with Usher syndrome type III and 6/20 (30%) patients with atypical Usher syndrome. The chip also identified two novel sequence variants, c.400C>T (p.R134X) in PCDH15 and c.1606T>C (p.C536S) in USH2A. The Usher genotyping microarray is a versatile and affordable screening tool for Usher syndrome. Its efficiency will improve with the addition of novel sequence variants with minimal extra costs, making it a very useful first-pass screening tool.",4
"Expression patterns of cardiac myofilament proteins: genomic and protein analysis of surgical myectomy tissue from patients with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Actin Cytoskeleton Adolescent Adult Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Expression Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains || Mutations in myofilament proteins, most commonly MYBPC3-encoded myosin-binding protein C and MYH7-encoded beta-myosin heavy chain, can cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Despite significant advances in structure-function relationships pertaining to the cardiac sarcomere, there is limited knowledge of how a mutation leads to clinical HCM. We, therefore, set out to study expression and localization of myofilament proteins in left ventricular tissue of patients with HCM. Frozen surgical myectomy specimens from 47 patients with HCM were examined and genotyped for mutations involving 8 myofilament-encoding genes. Myofilament protein levels were quantified by Western blotting with localization graded from immunohistochemical staining of tissue sections. Overall, 25 of 47 (53%) patients had myofilament-HCM, including 12 with MYBPC3-HCM and 9 with MYH7-HCM. As compared with healthy heart tissue, levels of myofilament proteins were increased in patients manifesting a mutation in either gene. Patients with a frameshift mutation predicted to truncate MYBPC3 exhibited marked disturbances in protein localization as compared with missense mutations in either MYBPC3 or MYH7. In this first expression study in human HCM tissue, increased myofilament protein levels in patients with either MYBPC3- or MYH7-mediated HCM suggest a poison peptide mechanism. Specifically, the mechanism of dysfunction may vary according to the genetic subgroup suggested by a distinctly abnormal distribution of myofilament proteins in patients manifesting a truncation mutation in MYBPC3.",4
Pompe disease presenting as an isolated generalized dilative arteriopathy with repeated brain and kidney infarcts. || Arteries Brain Infarction Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Kidney Diseases Male Middle Aged Vascular Diseases alpha-Glucosidases || ,3 1 4
"HRAS mutations in Costello syndrome: detection of constitutional activating mutations in codon 12 and 13 and loss of wild-type allele in malignancy. || Abnormalities, Multiple Adolescent Adult Alleles Base Sequence Cardiovascular Abnormalities Child Child, Preschool Codon Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Face Genes, ras Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Humans Infant Intellectual Disability Musculoskeletal Abnormalities Mutation Neoplasms Phenotype Skin Abnormalities Syndrome || Costello syndrome (CS) is a complex developmental disorder involving characteristic craniofacial features, failure to thrive, developmental delay, cardiac and skeletal anomalies, and a predisposition to develop neoplasia. Based on similarities with other cancer syndromes, we previously hypothesized that CS is likely due to activation of signal transduction through the Ras/MAPK pathway [Tartaglia et al., 2003]. In this study, the HRAS coding region was sequenced for mutations in a large, well-characterized cohort of 36 CS patients. Heterogeneous missense point mutations predicting an amino acid substitution were identified in 33/36 (92%) patients. The majority (91%) had a 34G --> A transition in codon 12. Less frequent mutations included 35G --> C (codon 12) and 37G --> T (codon 13). Parental samples did not have an HRAS mutation supporting the hypothesis of de novo heterogeneous mutations. There is phenotypic variability among patients with a 34G --> A transition. The most consistent features included characteristic facies and skin, failure to thrive, developmental delay, musculoskeletal abnormalities, visual impairment, cardiac abnormalities, and generalized hyperpigmentation. The two patients with 35G --> C had cardiac arrhythmias whereas one patient with a 37G --> T transversion had an enlarged aortic root. Of the patients with a clinical diagnosis of CS, neoplasia was the most consistent phenotypic feature for predicating an HRAS mutation. To gain an understanding of the relationship between constitutional HRAS mutations and malignancy, HRAS was sequenced in an advanced biphasic rhabdomyosarcoma/fibrosarcoma from an individual with a 34G --> A mutation. Loss of the wild-type HRAS allele was observed, suggesting tumorigenesis in CS patients is accompanied by additional somatic changes affecting HRAS. Finally, due to phenotypic overlap between CS and cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndromes, the HRAS coding region was sequenced in a well-characterized CFC cohort. No mutations were found which support a distinct genetic etiology between CS and CFC syndromes.",4
"Cardiac structural and sarcomere genes associated with cardiomyopathy exhibit marked intolerance of genetic variation. || Cardiomyopathies Codon, Nonsense Databases, Genetic Exome Gene Frequency Genetic Association Studies Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Variation Humans Mutation, Missense RNA, Messenger ROC Curve Sarcomeres || The clinical significance of variants in genes associated with inherited cardiomyopathies can be difficult to determine because of uncertainty regarding population genetic variation and a surprising amount of tolerance of the genome even to loss-of-function variants. We hypothesized that genes associated with cardiomyopathy might be particularly resistant to the accumulation of genetic variation. We analyzed the rates of single nucleotide genetic variation in all known genes from the exomes of >5000 individuals from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's Exome Sequencing Project, as well as the rates of structural variation from the Database of Genomic Variants. Most variants were rare, with over half unique to 1 individual. Cardiomyopathy-associated genes exhibited a rate of nonsense variants, about 96.1% lower than other Mendelian disease genes. We tested the ability of in silico algorithms to distinguish between a set of variants in MYBPC3, MYH7, and TNNT2 with strong evidence for pathogenicity and variants from the Exome Sequencing Project data. Algorithms based on conservation at the nucleotide level (genomic evolutionary rate profiling, PhastCons) did not perform as well as amino acid-level prediction algorithms (Polyphen-2, SIFT). Variants with strong evidence for disease causality were found in the Exome Sequencing Project data at prevalence higher than expected. Genes associated with cardiomyopathy carry very low rates of population variation. The existence in population data of variants with strong evidence for pathogenicity suggests that even for Mendelian disease genetics, a probabilistic weighting of multiple variants may be preferred over the single gene causality model.",4
"E-cadherin mutation-based genetic counseling and hereditary diffuse gastric carcinoma. || Cadherins DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Counseling Humans Mutation Stomach Neoplasms || The E-cadherin mutation has been identified in a subset of families with multiple cases of diffuse gastric carcinoma. However, the true penetrance of this mutation and its association with other carcinomas in such families remains elusive. We aim to show the importance of DNA-based genetic counseling in hereditary diffuse gastric carcinoma. The proband was self-referred after three of his siblings died of diffuse gastric carcinoma. Medical and pathology records confirmed diagnoses. The family was educated about diffuse gastric carcinoma. Analysis for the 70G-->T mutation was performed by sequencing genomic DNA from lymphocyte pellets. DNA results and genetic counseling were provided individually to those tested. Twenty-four family members were tested for the E-cadherin mutation. Nine were found to be positive and 15 were negative. Three who tested positive and were affected are now deceased. None of the 19 patients counseled wanted results sent to their physicians once they recognized the potential for insurance discrimination. None had undergone endoscopic ultrasound. Three who were positive for the E-cadherin mutation expressed strong interest in prophylactic gastrectomy. The E-cadherin mutation strongly predicts susceptibility to diffuse gastric carcinoma. Emotional stress in at-risk patients, the limited knowledge of the mutation's penetrance, and limitations of available screening mandate patient-centered genetic counseling.",2 4
"Identification of eight novel glucokinase mutations in Italian children with maturity-onset diabetes of the young. ||  || Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a clinically heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by early onset non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, autosomal dominant inheritance, and primary defect in the function of the beta cells of the pancreas. Mutations in the glucokinase (GCK) gene account for 8%-56% of MODY, with the highest prevalences being found in the southern Europe. While screening for GCK mutations in 28 MODY families of Italian origin, we identified 17 different mutations (corresponding to 61% prevalence), including eight previously undescribed ones. The novel sequence variants included five missense mutations (p.Lys161Asn c.483G>C in exon 4, p.Phe171Leu c.511T>C in exon 5 and p.Thr228Ala c.682A>G, p.Thr228Arg c.683C>G, p.Gly258Cys c.772G>T in exon 7), one nonsense mutation (p.Ser383Ter c.1148C>A in exon 9), the splice site variant c.1253+1G>T in intron 9, and the deletion of 12 nucleotides in exon 10 (p.Ser433_Ile436del c.1298_1309del12). Our study indicates that mutations in the GCK/MODY2 gene are a very common cause of MODY in the Italian population and broadens our knowledge of the naturally occurring GCK mutation repertoire.",4
"Frequency of CDH1 germline mutations in gastric carcinoma coming from high- and low-risk areas: metanalysis and systematic review of the literature. || Antigens, CD Cadherins Carcinoma Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Mutation Rate Stomach Neoplasms || The frequency of E-cadherin germline mutations in countries with different incidence rates for gastric carcinoma has not been well established. The goal of this study was to assess the worldwide frequency of CDH1 germline mutations in gastric cancers coming from low- and high-risk areas. English articles using MEDLINE access (from 1998 to 2011). Search terms included CDH1, E-cadherin, germline mutation, gastric cancer, hereditary, familial and diffuse histotype.The study included all E-cadherin germline mutations identified in gastric cancer patients; somatic mutations and germline mutations reported in other tumors were excluded.The method of this study was scheduled in accordance with the ""PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses"". Countries were classified as low- or middle/high risk-areas for gastric carcinoma incidence. Statistical analysis was performed to correlate the CDH1 mutation frequency with gastric cancer incidence areas. A total of 122 E-cadherin germline mutations have been identified; the majority (87.5%) occurred in gastric cancers coming from low-risk areas. In high-risk areas, we identified 16 mutations in which missense mutations were predominant. (68.8%). We verified a significant association between the mutation frequency and the gastric cancer risk area (p < 0.001: overall identified mutations in low- vs. middle/high-risk areas). E-cadherin genetic screenings performed in low-risk areas for gastric cancer identified a higher frequency of CDH1 germline mutations. This data could open new approaches in the gastric cancer prevention test; before proposing a proband candidate for the CDH1 genetic screening, geographic variability, alongside the family history should be considered.",4
"Myosin binding protein C: structural abnormalities in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Amino Acid Sequence Animals Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Carrier Proteins Humans Models, Structural Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Myocardium Protein Binding Protein Conformation Sarcomeres Sequence Alignment || The muscle protein myosin binding protein C (MyBPC) is a large multi-domain protein whose role in the sarcomere is complex and not yet fully understood. Mutations in MyBPC are strongly associated with the heart disease familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) and these experiments of nature have provided some insight into the intricate workings of this protein in the heart. While some regions of the MyBPC molecule have been assigned a function in the regulation of muscle contraction, the interaction of other regions with various parts of the myosin molecule and the sarcomeric proteins, actin and titin, remain obscure. In addition, several intra-domain interactions between adjacent MyBPC molecules have been identified. Although the basic structure of the molecule (a series of immunoglobulin and fibronectin domains) has been elucidated, the assembly of MyBPC in the sarcomere is a topic for debate. By analysing the MyBPC sequence with respect to FHC-causing mutations it is possible to identify individual residues or regions of each domain that may be important either for binding or regulation. This review looks at the current literature, in concert with alignments and the structural models of MyBPC, in an attempt to understand how FHC mutations may lead to the disease state.",4
"HRAS mutation analysis in Costello syndrome: genotype and phenotype correlation. ||  || Costello syndrome is a rare condition comprising mental retardation, distinctive facial appearance, cardiovascular abnormalities (typically pulmonic stenosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and/or atrial tachycardia), tumor predisposition, and skin and musculoskeletal abnormalities. Recently mutations in HRAS were identified in 12 Japanese and Italian patients with clinical information available on 7 of the Japanese patients. To expand the molecular delineation of Costello syndrome, we performed mutation analysis in 34 North American and 6 European (total 40) patients with Costello syndrome, and detected missense mutations in HRAS in 33 (82.5%) patients. All mutations affected either codon 12 or 13 of the protein product, with G12S occurring in 30 (90.9%) patients of the mutation-positive cases. In two patients, we found a mutation resulting in an alanine substitution in position 12 (G12A), and in one patient, we detected a novel mutation (G13C). Five different HRAS mutations have now been reported in Costello syndrome, however genotype-phenotype correlation remains incomplete.",4
"Somatic mutations in <i>CDH1</i> and <i>CTNNB1</i> in primary carcinomas at 13 anatomic sites. || carcinomas detachment epithelial-mesenchymal transition metastasis mutation || Metastases are involved in most cancer deaths. Evidence has suggested that cancer cell detachment from primary tumors might occur largely via the mechanism of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) activated by epigenetic events, but data addressing other possible triggers of detachment, particularly genetic mutations, have been limited. Using the Profile study of cancer genomics at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, we examined somatic mutations in the EMT genes <i>CDH1</i> in 5,106 primary carcinomas and <i>CTNNB1</i> in 7,578 primary carcinomas across 13 anatomic sites: urinary bladder, breast, colon/rectum, endometrium, esophagus, kidney, lung, ovary, pancreas, prostate, skin (non-melanoma), stomach, and thyroid. For each gene and anatomic site, we calculated the prevalence of primary carcinomas with at least one mutation. Across all anatomic sites, 4% of carcinomas had at least one <i>CDH1</i> mutation and 4% of carcinomas had at least one <i>CTNNB1</i> mutation. By anatomic site, the observed prevalence of carcinomas with at least one mutation was less than 5% at 10 sites for <i>CDH1</i> and 12 sites for <i>CTNNB1</i>. Tumor stage data were available for a subset of breast, colorectal, lung, and prostate tumors. Among patients from this subset who were diagnosed with regional or distant disease, only 4% had a <i>CDH1</i> mutation and 1% had a <i>CTNNB1</i> mutation in the primary tumor. The low mutation prevalences, especially among those with diagnoses of regional or distant disease, suggest that somatic mutations in <i>CDH1</i> and <i>CTNNB1</i> are unlikely to explain a substantial proportion of cancer cell detachment from primary carcinomas originating at most anatomic sites.",4
"Detection of a novel mutation (stop 468) in exon 10 of the low-density lipoprotein receptor gene causing familial hypercholesterolemia among French Canadians. || Adolescent Adult Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies DNA Primers Exons Female France Heterozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Quebec Receptors, LDL || ",2 4
"Functional characterization and structural modeling of obesity associated mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor. ||  || Mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) gene are the most common known cause of monogenic human obesity. The MC4R gene was sequenced in 2000 subjects with severe early-onset obesity. We detected seven different nonsense and 19 nonsynonymous mutations in a total of 94 probands, some of which have been reported previously by others. We functionally characterized the 11 novel obesity associated missense mutations. Seven of these mutants (L54P, E61K, I69T, S136P, M161T, T162I, and I269N) showed impaired cell surface trafficking, reduced level of maximal binding of the radioligand [125I]NDP-MSH, and reduced ability to generate cAMP in response to ligand. Four mutant MC4Rs (G55V, G55D, S136F, and A303T) displayed cell surface expression and agonist binding similar to the wild-type receptor but showed impaired cAMP production, suggesting that these residues are likely to be critical for conformational rearrangement essential for receptor activation. Homology modeling of these mutants using a model of MC4R based on the crystal structure of the beta2-adrenoreceptor was used to provide insights into the possible structural basis for receptor dysfunction. Transmembrane (TM) domains 1, 3, 6, 7, and peripheral helix 8 appear to participate in the agonist-induced conformational rearrangement necessary for coupling of ligand binding to signaling. We conclude that G55V, G55D, S136F, and A303T mutations are likely to strengthen helix-helix interactions between TM1 and TM2, TM3 and TM6, and TM7 and helix 8, respectively, preventing relative movement of these helices during receptor activation. The combination of functional studies and structural modeling of naturally occurring pathogenic mutations in MC4R can provide valuable information regarding the molecular mechanism of MC4R activation and its dysfunction in human disease.",4 0
"Mutations of the light meromyosin domain of the beta-myosin heavy chain rod in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Child Child, Preschool Comorbidity DNA Mutational Analysis Death, Sudden, Cardiac Echocardiography Electrocardiography Female Genes, Dominant Genetic Heterogeneity Genetic Testing Haplotypes Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Myosin Subfragments Pedigree Penetrance Protein Structure, Tertiary South Africa United Kingdom Ventricular Myosins || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is caused by mutations in 9 sarcomeric protein genes. The most commonly affected is beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH7), where missense mutations cluster in the head and neck regions and directly affect motor function. Comparable mutations have not been described in the light meromyosin (LMM) region of the myosin rod, nor would these be expected to directly affect motor function. We studied 82 probands with HCM in whom no mutations had been found in MYH7 exons encoding the head and neck regions of myosin nor in the other frequently implicated disease genes. Primers were designed to amplify exons 24 to 40 of MYH7. These amplimers were subjected to temperature modulated heteroduplex analysis by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography. An Ala1379Thr missense mutation in exon 30 segregated with disease in three families and was not present in 200 normal chromosomes. The mutation occurred on two haplotypes, indicating that it was not a polymorphism linked with another disease-causing mutation. The position of this residue within the LMM region of myosin suggests that it may be important for thick filament assembly or for accessory protein binding. A further missense mutation in exon 37, Ser1776Gly, segregated with disease in a single family and was absent from 400 population-matched control chromosomes. Because the Ser1776 residue occupies a core position in the myosin rod at which the substitution of glycine is extremely energetically unfavorable, it is likely to disrupt the coiled-coil structure. We conclude that mutation of the LMM can cause HCM and that such mutations may act through novel mechanisms of disease pathogenesis involving myosin filament assembly or interaction with thick filament binding proteins.",4
"Global molecular analysis and APOE mutations in a cohort of autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia patients in France. || Adult Apolipoproteins B Apolipoproteins E Child Cohort Studies Exons Female France Genotyping Techniques Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Models, Molecular Mutation Phenotype Proprotein Convertase 9 Protein Conformation, alpha-Helical Receptors, LDL Young Adult || Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH) is a human disorder characterized phenotypically by isolated high-cholesterol levels. Mutations in the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), APOB, and proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) genes are well known to be associated with the disease. To characterize the genetic background associated with ADH in France, the three ADH-associated genes were sequenced in a cohort of 120 children and 109 adult patients. Fifty-one percent of the cohort had a possible deleterious variant in LDLR, 3.1% in APOB, and 1.7% in PCSK9. We identified 18 new variants in LDLR and 2 in PCSK9. Three LDLR variants, including two newly identified, were studied by minigene reporter assay confirming the predicted effects on splicing. Additionally, as recently an in-frame deletion in the APOE gene was found to be linked to ADH, the sequencing of this latter gene was performed in patients without a deleterious variant in the three former genes. An APOE variant was identified in three patients with isolated severe hypercholesterolemia giving a frequency of 1.3% in the cohort. Therefore, even though LDLR mutations are the major cause of ADH with a large mutation spectrum, APOE variants were found to be significantly associated with the disease. Furthermore, using structural analysis and modeling, the identified APOE sequence changes were predicted to impact protein function.",4
"Early results of sarcomeric gene screening from the Egyptian National BA-HCM Program. || Adolescent Adult Aged Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Child Child, Preschool CpG Islands DNA Mutational Analysis Egypt Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Phenotype Prognosis Sarcomeres Troponin T Young Adult || The present study comprised sarcomeric genotyping of the three most commonly involved sarcomeric genes: MYBPC3, MYH7, and TNNT2 in 192 unrelated Egyptian hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) index patients. Mutations were detected in 40 % of cases. Presence of positive family history was significantly (p=0.002) associated with a higher genetic positive yield (49/78, 62.8 %). The majority of the detected mutations in the three sarcomeric genes were novel (40/62, 65 %) and mostly private (47/62, 77 %). Single nucleotide substitution was the most frequently detected mutation type (51/62, 82 %). Over three quarters of these substitutions (21/27, 78 %) involved CpG dinucleotide sites and resulted from C>T or G>A transition in the three analyzed genes, highlighting the significance of CpG high mutability within the sarcomeric genes examined. This study could aid in global comparative studies in different ethnic populations and constitutes an important step in the evolution of the integrated clinical, translational, and basic science HCM program.",4
"Targeted genetic testing for familial hypercholesterolaemia using next generation sequencing: a population-based study. || Adult Aged DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Testing High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Receptors, LDL Scotland Serine Endopeptidases || Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is a common Mendelian condition which, untreated, results in premature coronary heart disease. An estimated 88% of FH cases are undiagnosed in the UK. We previously validated a method for FH mutation detection in a lipid clinic population using next generation sequencing (NGS), but this did not address the challenge of identifying index cases in primary care where most undiagnosed patients receive healthcare. Here, we evaluate the targeted use of NGS as a potential route to diagnosis of FH in a primary care population subset selected for hypercholesterolaemia. We used microfluidics-based PCR amplification coupled with NGS and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) to detect mutations in LDLR, APOB and PCSK9 in three phenotypic groups within the Generation Scotland: Scottish Family Health Study including 193 individuals with high total cholesterol, 232 with moderately high total cholesterol despite cholesterol-lowering therapy, and 192 normocholesterolaemic controls. Pathogenic mutations were found in 2.1% of hypercholesterolaemic individuals, in 2.2% of subjects on cholesterol-lowering therapy and in 42% of their available first-degree relatives. In addition, variants of uncertain clinical significance (VUCS) were detected in 1.4% of the hypercholesterolaemic and cholesterol-lowering therapy groups. No pathogenic variants or VUCS were detected in controls. We demonstrated that population-based genetic testing using these protocols is able to deliver definitive molecular diagnoses of FH in individuals with high cholesterol or on cholesterol-lowering therapy. The lower cost and labour associated with NGS-based testing may increase the attractiveness of a population-based approach to FH detection compared to genetic testing with conventional sequencing. This could provide one route to increasing the present low percentage of FH cases with a genetic diagnosis.",4
"Frequency of mutations in individuals with breast cancer referred for BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing using next-generation sequencing with a 25-gene panel. || BRCA1 Protein BRCA2 Protein Breast Neoplasms Cross-Sectional Studies Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Middle Aged Mutation Rate Sequence Analysis, DNA || Next-generation sequencing (NGS) allows for simultaneous sequencing of multiple cancer susceptibility genes and, for an individual, may be more efficient and less expensive than sequential testing. The authors assessed the frequency of deleterious germline mutations among individuals with breast cancer who were referred for BRCA1 and BRCA2 (BRCA1/2) gene testing using a panel of 25 genes associated with inherited cancer predisposition. This was a cross-sectional study using NGS in 2158 individuals, including 1781 who were referred for commercial BRCA1/2 gene testing (cohort 1) and 377 who had detailed personal and family history and had previously tested negative for BRCA1/2 mutations (cohort 2). Mutations were identified in 16 genes, most frequently in BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, ATM, and PALB2. Among the participants in cohort 1, 9.3% carried a BRCA1/2 mutation, 3.9% carried a mutation in another breast/ovarian cancer susceptibility gene, and 0.3% carried an incidental mutation in another cancer susceptibility gene unrelated to breast or ovarian cancer. In cohort 2, the frequency of mutations in breast/ovarian-associated genes other than BRCA1/2 was 2.9%, and an additional 0.8% had an incidental mutation. In cohort 1, Lynch syndrome-related mutations were identified in 7 individuals. In contrast to BRCA1/2 mutations, neither age at breast cancer diagnosis nor family history of ovarian or young breast cancer predicted for other mutations. The frequency of mutations in genes other than BRCA1/2 was lower in Ashkenazi Jews compared with non-Ashkenazi individuals (P=.026). Using an NGS 25-gene panel, the frequency of mutations in genes other than BRCA1/2 was 4.3%, and most mutations (3.9%) were identified in genes associated with breast/ovarian cancer.",4
"Severe cardiac conduction disturbances and pacemaker implantation in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Arrhythmias, Cardiac Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Female Humans Male Middle Aged Pacemaker, Artificial Retrospective Studies Severity of Illness Index || The aims of this study were to determine the prevalence of severe cardiac conduction disturbances in a cohort of 451 patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and to describe the characteristics of, and outcomes in, those who required a permanent pacemaker. A pacemaker was implanted in 48 patients (11%): 20 had sinus node dysfunction and 28 had an atrioventricular conduction disturbance. Primary bradyarrhythmia (which was not related to iatrogenic atrioventricular block or therapeutic ablation of the atrioventricular node) was the reason for permanent pacemaker implantation in 36 patients (8%). In 18% of cases, at least one other family member had a permanent pacemaker. In this patient series, a high prevalence of severe cardiac conduction disturbance leading to permanent pacemaker implantation was observed. Severe cardiac conduction disturbance in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may also have a familial component.",4
"Actionable exomic incidental findings in 6503 participants: challenges of variant classification. || Adult African Continental Ancestry Group European Continental Ancestry Group Exome Female Gene Frequency Genes, Dominant Genetic Association Studies Genetic Testing Genome, Human Genomics High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Incidental Findings Male Phenotype Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide || Recommendations for laboratories to report incidental findings from genomic tests have stimulated interest in such results. In order to investigate the criteria and processes for assigning the pathogenicity of specific variants and to estimate the frequency of such incidental findings in patients of European and African ancestry, we classified potentially actionable pathogenic single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in all 4300 European- and 2203 African-ancestry participants sequenced by the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project (ESP). We considered 112 gene-disease pairs selected by an expert panel as associated with medically actionable genetic disorders that may be undiagnosed in adults. The resulting classifications were compared to classifications from other clinical and research genetic testing laboratories, as well as with in silico pathogenicity scores. Among European-ancestry participants, 30 of 4300 (0.7%) had a pathogenic SNV and six (0.1%) had a disruptive variant that was expected to be pathogenic, whereas 52 (1.2%) had likely pathogenic SNVs. For African-ancestry participants, six of 2203 (0.3%) had a pathogenic SNV and six (0.3%) had an expected pathogenic disruptive variant, whereas 13 (0.6%) had likely pathogenic SNVs. Genomic Evolutionary Rate Profiling mammalian conservation score and the Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion summary score of conservation, substitution, regulation, and other evidence were compared across pathogenicity assignments and appear to have utility in variant classification. This work provides a refined estimate of the burden of adult onset, medically actionable incidental findings expected from exome sequencing, highlights challenges in variant classification, and demonstrates the need for a better curated variant interpretation knowledge base.",4
"The use of targeted exome sequencing in genetic diagnosis of young patients with severe hypercholesterolemia. || Adolescent Animals CHO Cells Cricetulus DNA Mutational Analysis Exome Female HEK293 Cells Humans Hypercholesterolemia Male Molecular Diagnostic Techniques Receptors, LDL Sequence Analysis, DNA || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disorder. Although genetic testing is an important tool for detecting FH-causing mutations in patients, diagnostic methods for young patients with severe hypercholesterolemia are understudied. This study compares the target exome sequencing (TES) technique with the DNA resequencing array technique on young patients with severe hypercholesterolemia. A total of 20 unrelated patients (mean age 14.8 years) with total cholesterol > 10 mmol/L were included. 12 patient samples were processed by DNA resequencing array, 14 patient samples were processed by TES, and 6 patient samples were processed by both methods. Functional characterization of novel mutations was performed by flow cytometry. The mutation detection rate (MDR) of DNA resequencing array was 75%, while the MDR of TES was 100%. A total of 27 different mutations in the LDLR were identified, including 3 novel mutations and 8 mutations with previously unknown pathogenicity. Functional characterization of c.673delA, c.1363delC, p.Leu575Phe and p.Leu582Phe variants found that all of them are pathogenic. Additionally, 7 patients were diagnosed with Heterozygous FH (HeFH) in which lipid levels were significantly higher than common HeFH patients. This data indicates that TES is a very efficient tool for genetic diagnosis in young patients with severe hypercholesterolemia.",4 0
"Pancreatic Histopathology of Human Monogenic Diabetes Due to Causal Variants in KCNJ11, HNF1A, GATA6, and LMNA. ||  || Monogenic diabetes is thought to account for 2% of all diabetes cases, but most patients receive misdiagnoses of type 1 or type 2 diabetes. To date, little is known about the histopathological features of pancreata from patients with monogenic diabetes. Retrospective study of the JDRF Network for Pancreatic Organ Donors with Diabetes biorepository to identify possible cases of monogenic diabetes and to compare effects of genetic variants on pancreas histology. We selected cases of diabetes for genetic testing on the basis of criteria that included young age at diagnosis, low body mass index, negative autoantibody status, and/or detectable C-peptide level. Samples underwent next-generation-targeted sequencing of 140 diabetes/diabetes-related genes. Pancreas weight and histopathology were reviewed. Forty-one of 140 cases of diabetes met the clinical inclusion criteria, with 38 DNA samples available. Genetic variants of probable clinical significance were found in four cases: one each in KCNJ11, HNF1A, GATA6, and LMNA. The KCNJ11 and HNF1A samples had significantly decreased pancreas weight and insulin mass similar to that of type 1 diabetes but had no insulitis. The GATA6 sample had severe pancreatic atrophy but with abundant β cells and severe amyloidosis similar to type 2 diabetes. The LMNA sample had preserved pancreas weight and insulin mass but abnormal islet architecture and exocrine fatty infiltrates. Four cases of diabetes had putative causal variants in monogenic diabetes genes. This study provides further insight into the heterogeneous nature of monogenic diabetes cases that exhibited clinical and pathophysiological features that overlap with type 1/type 2 diabetes.",4
"A new missense mutation, Arg719Gln, in the beta-cardiac heavy chain myosin gene of patients with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Amino Acid Sequence Arginine Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 1 Chromosomes, Human, Pair 11 Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15 DNA DNA Primers Female Glutamine Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Myocardium Myosins Pedigree Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Reference Values || ",2 4
"Mutations in the low-density lipoprotein receptor gene in Chinese familial hypercholesterolemia patients. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Asian Continental Ancestry Group Child Female Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Receptors, LDL || It has been reported that in China, patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) may go unrecognized because they do not have xanthomata or premature coronary heart disease and their LDL cholesterol levels are lower than those in their Western counterparts. However, in the Chinese patients in Hong Kong, heterozygous FH appears to manifest in a way similar to that seen in Western countries or Japan. We studied sequence variations in the promoter and coding regions of the 18 exons of the LDL receptor gene in 30 Chinese FH patients. Eighteen mutations were identified in 21 patients scattered in the promoter and 10 exons. Eleven of them were first found in this study. We also found 6 polymorphisms with allelic frequencies different from those in whites but similar to the Japanese, indicating some isolation between white and Oriental populations. A total of 29 mutations in the LDL receptor gene are now known in the Chinese. There is no definite common mutation due to a founder effect. Meanwhile, there were no detectable LDL receptor gene mutations in 9 clinically diagnosed FH patients in whom the R3500Q mutation in apolipoprotein B had also been excluded. The gene defects leading to the FH phenotype in these patients may occur somewhere else in the apolipoprotein B or other related genes, or even in the noncoding sequences of the LDL receptor gene.",4
"Retrospective study of prenatal ultrasound findings in newborns with a Noonan spectrum disorder. || DNA Mutational Analysis Female GTP Phosphohydrolases High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Infant Infant, Newborn MAP Kinase Kinase 1 Male Membrane Proteins Noonan Syndrome Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Pregnancy Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-raf Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras) Retrospective Studies SOS1 Protein Ultrasonography, Prenatal || Noonan spectrum disorders (NSDs) occur in 1:1000-2500 live births. Currently, there are no guidelines for prenatal molecular genetic testing for NSDs. Recent studies recommend prenatal testing for NSDs when ultrasonography detects two or more associated abnormalities. A stronger association between ultrasound findings and NSDs would enable more informed prenatal genetic testing. A total of 212 newborns (0-12 weeks) with prenatal ultrasound findings and a clinical suspicion of a NSD were referred for molecular genetic testing. Of these, 159/212 newborns tested had a single ultrasound abnormality and 53/212 newborns had two or more. Testing was performed by either a microarray-based resequencing assay or next generation sequencing of RAS/MAPK pathway genes associated with NSDs. Prenatal ultrasound findings in positive and negative cases were compared. A disease-causing variant was identified in 21.7% (46/212) of newborns tested. Of these positive cases, 67.4% (31/46) had only one ultrasound abnormality reported. The rate of detecting a disease-causing variant in cases with one ultrasound finding was 19.5% (31/159), which was not significantly different (p-value = 0.36) than that in cases with two or more ultrasound findings (28.3%; 15/53). Prenatal molecular testing for NSDs should be considered even in the presence of a single associated abnormal ultrasound finding. © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.",4
"Z-band alternatively spliced PDZ motif protein (ZASP) is the major O-linked β-N-acetylglucosamine-substituted protein in human heart myofibrils. || Acetylglucosamine Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Alternative Splicing Amino Acid Sequence Antibodies, Monoclonal Fluorescent Antibody Technique, Indirect Gene Expression Regulation Heart Humans LIM Domain Proteins Microscopy, Fluorescence Molecular Sequence Data Myofibrils Peptides Signal Transduction Spectrometry, Mass, Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption-Ionization || We studied O-linked β-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) modification of contractile proteins in human heart using SDS-PAGE and three detection methods: specific enzymatic conjugation of O-GlcNAc with UDP-N-azidoacetylgalactosamine (UDP-GalNAz) that is then linked to a tetramethylrhodamine fluorescent tag and CTD110.6 and RL2 monoclonal antibodies to O-GlcNAc. All three methods showed that O-GlcNAc modification was predominantly in a group of bands ~90 kDa that did not correspond to any of the major myofibrillar proteins. MALDI-MS/MS identified the 90-kDa band as the protein ZASP (Z-band alternatively spliced PDZ motif protein), a minor component of the Z-disc (about 1 per 400 α-actinin) important for myofibrillar development and mechanotransduction. This was confirmed by the co-localization of O-GlcNAc and ZASP in Western blotting and by immunofluorescence microscopy. O-GlcNAcylation of ZASP increased in diseased heart, being 49 ± 5% of all O-GlcNAc in donor, 68 ± 9% in end-stage failing heart, and 76 ± 6% in myectomy muscle samples (donor versus myectomy p < 0.05). ZASP is only 22% of all O-GlcNAcylated proteins in mouse heart myofibrils.",4
"Germline TP53 mutations result into a constitutive defect of p53 DNA binding and transcriptional response to DNA damage. || Adolescent Adult Aged Case-Control Studies Child Child, Preschool Chromatin Immunoprecipitation DNA DNA Damage Female Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Lymphocytes Male Middle Aged Transcription, Genetic Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) results from heterozygous germline mutations of TP53, encoding a key transcriptional factor activated in response to DNA damage. We have recently shown, from a large LFS series, that dominant-negative missense mutations are the most clinically severe and, thanks to a new p53 functional assay in lymphocytes, that they alter the p53 transcriptional response to DNA damage more drastically than null mutations. In this study, we first confirmed this observation by performing the p53 functional assay in lymphocytes from 56 TP53 mutation carriers harbouring 35 distinct alterations. Then, to compare the impact of the different types of germline TP53 mutations on DNA binding, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-Seq) in lymphocytes exposed to doxorubicin. ChIP-Seq performed in wild-type TP53 control lymphocytes accurately mapped 1287 p53-binding sites. New p53-binding sites were validated using a functional assay in yeast. ChIP-Seq analysis of LFS lymphocytes carrying TP53 null mutations (p.P152Rfs*18 or complete deletion) or the low penetrant 'Brazilian' p.R337H mutation revealed a moderate decrease of p53-binding sites (949, 580 and 620, respectively) and of ChIP-Seq peak depths. In contrast, analysis of LFS lymphocytes with TP53 dominant-negative missense mutations p.R273H or p.R248W revealed only 310 and 143 p53-binding sites, respectively, and the depths of the corresponding peaks were drastically reduced. Altogether, our results show that TP53 mutation carriers exhibit a constitutive defect of the transcriptional response to DNA damage and that the clinical severity of TP53 dominant-negative missense mutations is explained by a massive and global alteration of p53 DNA binding.",3 4 0
"Prevalence of vascular complications among patients with glucokinase mutations and prolonged, mild hyperglycemia. ||  || Glycemic targets in diabetes have been developed to minimize complication risk. Patients with heterozygous, inactivating glucokinase (GCK) mutations have mild fasting hyperglycemia from birth, resulting in an elevated glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level that mimics recommended levels for type 1 and type 2 diabetes. To assess the association between chronic, mild hyperglycemia and complication prevalence and severity in patients with GCK mutations. Cross-sectional study in the United Kingdom between August 2008 and December 2010. Assessment of microvascular and macrovascular complications in participants 35 years or older was conducted in 99 GCK mutation carriers (median age, 48.6 years), 91 nondiabetic, familial, nonmutation carriers (control) (median age, 52.2 years), and 83 individuals with young-onset type 2 diabetes (YT2D), diagnosed at age 45 years or younger (median age, 54.7 years). Prevalence and severity of nephropathy, retinopathy, peripheral neuropathy, peripheral vascular disease, and cardiovascular disease. Median HbA1c was 6.9% in patients with the GCK mutation, 5.8% in controls, and 7.8% in patients with YT2D. Patients with GCK had a low prevalence of clinically significant microvascular complications (1% [95% CI, 0%-5%]) that was not significantly different from controls (2% [95% CI, 0.3%-8%], P=.52) and lower than in patients with YT2D (36% [95% CI, 25%-47%], P<.001). Thirty percent of patients with GCK had retinopathy (95% CI, 21%-41%) compared with 14% of controls (95% CI, 7%-23%, P=.007) and 63% of patients with YT2D (95% CI, 51%-73%, P<.001). Neither patients with GCK nor controls required laser therapy for retinopathy compared with 28% (95% CI, 18%-39%) of patients with YT2D (P<.001). Neither patients with GCK patients nor controls had proteinuria and microalbuminuria was rare (GCK, 1% [95% CI, 0.2%-6%]; controls, 2% [95% CI, 0.2%-8%]), whereas 10% (95% CI, 4%-19%) of YT2D patients had proteinuria (P<.001 vs GCK) and 21% (95% CI, 13%-32%) had microalbuminuria (P<.001). Neuropathy was rare in patients with GCK (2% [95% CI, 0.3%-8%]) and controls (95% CI, 0% [0%-4%]) but present in 29% (95% CI, 20%-50%) of YT2D patients (P<.001). Patients with GCK had a low prevalence of clinically significant macrovascular complications (4% [95% CI, 1%-10%]) that was not significantly different from controls (11% [95% CI, 5%-19%]; P=.09), and lower in prevalence than patients with YT2D (30% [95% CI, 21%-41%], P<.001). Despite a median duration of 48.6 years of hyperglycemia, patients with a GCK mutation had low prevalence of microvascular and macrovascular complications. These findings may provide insights into the risks associated with isolated, mild hyperglycemia.",4
"A p.R870H mutation in the beta-cardiac myosin heavy chain 7 gene causes familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in several members of an Indian family. || Adolescent Adult Aged Angiotensins Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Female Humans Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular India Male Middle Aged Molecular Diagnostic Techniques Mutation Myocardium Myosin Heavy Chains Myosins Pilot Projects Polymorphism, Genetic Risk Factors Sarcomeres || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder characterized mainly by left ventricular hypertrophy and myocyte disarray; it is the most common cause of sudden death in otherwise healthy individuals. More than 270 mutations in genes encoding the cardiac sarcomere have been identified. Attempts to establish a genotype-phenotype correlation for each of the mutations have not been highly successful. It has been suggested that additional genetic loci, as well as nongenetic factors such as lifestyle, gender and age, may play a role in modulating the clinical presentation of the disease. The p.R870H mutation has been identified as the cause of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in an Indian family. The results indicate that the disease phenotype varied among various affected members of the family, and the variation may be attributed to factors, such as gender and gene dosage.",2 4
"Novel variants in the MC4R and LEPR genes among severely obese children from the Iberian population. || Anthropometry Base Sequence Computational Biology Genetic Testing Genotype Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Obesity, Morbid Phenotype Portugal Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Leptin Sequence Analysis, DNA Spain || We screened for mutations in the MC4R and LEPR genes and investigated the genotype-phenotype correlation in obese individuals belonging to families with evident hereditary patterns of severe and early-onset obesity among the Iberian population. A total of 202 unrelated and severely obese patients since childhood, were enrolled in the study. Bidirectional sequencing of the MC4R gene was carried out in all patients; the LEPR gene was sequenced in 15 individuals based on additional clinical signals. Segregation analysis and/or genotype-phenotype description was performed for subjects with the new mutations and with presumably functional variants. Ten MC4R gene mutations were identified in the heterozygous state in 10 patients. Mutations p.R147G and p.G323E are new and mutations p.R7H, p.G32E, p.H76R, p.V103I, p.S127L, p.T150I, p.I251L and p.G252S were previously described. A new dinucleotide insertion -77_-76insTA in the promoter region of the LEPR gene was found in the heterozygous state in one patient. The new p.R147G and the previously published p.R7H, p.S127L, p.T150I and p.G252S MC4R mutations, cosegregate with obesity in our patients and were predicted to be deleterious. For the novel MC4R p.G323E and LEPR -77_-76insTA gene mutations, the genotype-phenotype correlation and bioinformatic analysis did not clarify whether these mutations are indeed implicated in obesity.",2 4
"Clinical impact of the alpha-galactosidase A gene single nucleotide polymorphism -10C>T: A single-center observational study. || Adult Biomarkers Echocardiography Fabry Disease Female Genetic Testing Genotype Heterozygote Humans Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Middle Aged Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Prospective Studies Skin alpha-Galactosidase || Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the alpha-galactosidase A gene region (GLA) have been discussed as potential cause of symptoms and organ manifestations similarly to those seen in Fabry disease (FD). However, due to scarce data, clinical implications remain limited. The aim of the present study was to investigate the clinical impact of -10C>T SNP in the GLA.Prospective single-center observational study to determine the natural history and outcome of FD.Subjects initially referred to the Fabry Center for Interdisciplinary Therapy Würzburg (FAZIT) for management of suspected FD (11 women, 2 men, mean age 42 ± 10 years) who were tested negative for coding GLA mutations but positive for the noncoding -10C>T SNP underwent comprehensive characterization for therapy recommendation.All subjects reported at least 1 neurological, but no cardiac or renal symptoms. In 7 patients, pain of unknown etiology was reported and 3 patients had a history of cryptogenic stroke. In all patients, α-GAL activity was at a lower limit, ranging between 0.27 and 0.45 nmol/min per mg protein (reference: 0.4-1.0), while plasma Lyso-Gb3 levels remained normal (range 0.39 ± 0.33; reference: ≤0.9 ng/mL). For both hemizygous subjects investigated, brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed unspecific white matter lesions. One of these subjects had suffered from severe early-onset stroke, the other showed mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Presence of isolated heterozygous -10C >T SNP is not associated with clinically relevant symptoms or organ manifestations as seen in FD. Respective polymorphisms might, however, play a role in modifying disease severity in FD. Great care has to be taken in respective subjects suspected to suffer from nonclassical FD in order to prevent unnecessary Fabry-specific therapy.",4
"Screening for pharmacological chaperones in Fabry disease. || Biological Assay Cells, Cultured Drug Design Fabry Disease Humans Leukocytes, Mononuclear Male Molecular Chaperones T-Lymphocytes alpha-Galactosidase || As a prerequisite for clinical trials of pharmacological chaperone therapy (PCT) for Fabry disease, we developed a rapid screening assay for enhancement of endogenous alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A) in patient-derived cells. We used a T-cell based system to screen 11 mutations causing Fabry disease for enhanceability using 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin (DGJ). When patient-derived T-cells were grown in the presence of DGJ, alpha-Gal A activity increased to more than 50% of normal in several mutations but was unaffected in others. In addition to the mutation R301Q, reported previously, A97V, R112H, R112C, A143T, and L300P were enhanceable, but R356W, G132R, A143P, R220X, and 30delG were not. The level of alpha-Gal A activity achieved provides a basis for the therapeutic trial of DGJ in patients with similarly enhanceable enzyme. This assay method has general utility in other disorders in assessing the degree of enhancement of activity of mutated proteins by PCT.",4 0
"Molecular and phenotypic abnormalities in individuals with germline heterozygous PTEN mutations and autism. || Adolescent Autism Spectrum Disorder Brain Case-Control Studies Child Female Genetic Association Studies Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Mutation, Missense PTEN Phosphohydrolase Prospective Studies Synaptic Transmission Young Adult || PTEN is a tumor suppressor associated with an inherited cancer syndrome and an important regulator of ongoing neural connectivity and plasticity. The present study examined molecular and phenotypic characteristics of individuals with germline heterozygous PTEN mutations and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (PTEN-ASD), with the aim of identifying pathophysiologic markers that specifically associate with PTEN-ASD and that may serve as targets for future treatment trials. PTEN-ASD patients (n=17) were compared with idiopathic (non-PTEN) ASD patients with (macro-ASD, n=16) and without macrocephaly (normo-ASD, n=38) and healthy controls (n=14). Group differences were evaluated for PTEN pathway protein expression levels, global and regional structural brain volumes and cortical thickness measures, neurocognition and adaptive behavior. RNA expression patterns and brain characteristics of a murine model of Pten mislocalization were used to further evaluate abnormalities observed in human PTEN-ASD patients. PTEN-ASD had a high proportion of missense mutations and showed reduced PTEN protein levels. Compared with the other groups, prominent white-matter and cognitive abnormalities were specifically associated with PTEN-ASD patients, with strong reductions in processing speed and working memory. White-matter abnormalities mediated the relationship between PTEN protein reductions and reduced cognitive ability. The Pten(m3m4) murine model had differential expression of genes related to myelination and increased corpus callosum. Processing speed and working memory deficits and white-matter abnormalities may serve as useful features that signal clinicians that PTEN is etiologic and prompting referral to genetic professionals for gene testing, genetic counseling and cancer risk management; and could reveal treatment targets in trials of treatments for PTEN-ASD.",3 4
"E-cadherin germline mutations define an inherited cancer syndrome dominated by diffuse gastric cancer. ||  || To extend earlier observations of germline E-cadherin mutations in kindreds with an inherited susceptibility to diffuse gastric cancer, we searched for germline E-cadherin mutations in five further families affected predominantly by diffuse gastric cancer and one family with a history of diffuse gastric cancer and early-onset breast cancer. Heterozygous inactivating mutations were found in the E-cadherin gene in each of these families. No mutation hotspots were identified. These results demonstrate that germline mutation of the E-cadherin gene is a common cause of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer and suggest a role for these mutations in the incidence of breast cancer.",2 4
Two novel and two known low-density lipoprotein receptor gene mutations in German patients with familial hypercholesterolemia. ||  || ,4
"Reassessment of Mendelian gene pathogenicity using 7,855 cardiomyopathy cases and 60,706 reference samples. || Cardiomyopathies Computational Biology Databases, Genetic Exome Genetic Diseases, Inborn Genetic Testing Genetic Variation Genome, Human High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Mutation Whole Exome Sequencing || The accurate interpretation of variation in Mendelian disease genes has lagged behind data generation as sequencing has become increasingly accessible. Ongoing large sequencing efforts present huge interpretive challenges, but they also provide an invaluable opportunity to characterize the spectrum and importance of rare variation. We analyzed sequence data from 7,855 clinical cardiomyopathy cases and 60,706 Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) reference samples to obtain a better understanding of genetic variation in a representative autosomal dominant disorder. We found that in some genes previously reported as important causes of a given cardiomyopathy, rare variation is not clinically informative because there is an unacceptably high likelihood of false-positive interpretation. By contrast, in other genes, we find that diagnostic laboratories may be overly conservative when assessing variant pathogenicity. We outline improved analytical approaches that evaluate which genes and variant classes are interpretable and propose that these will increase the clinical utility of testing across a range of Mendelian diseases.Genet Med 19 2, 192-203.",3 1 4
"Insights into the pathogenicity of rare missense GCK variants from the identification and functional characterization of compound heterozygous and double mutations inherited in cis. || Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Genetic Testing Glucokinase Heterozygote Humans Male Mutation, Missense Pedigree || To demonstrate the importance of using a combined genetic and functional approach to correctly interpret a genetic test for monogenic diabetes. We identified three probands with a phenotype consistent with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) subtype GCK-MODY, in whom two potential pathogenic mutations were identified: [R43H/G68D], [E248 K/I225M], or [G261R/D217N]. Allele-specific PCR and cosegregation were used to determine phase. Single and double mutations were kinetically characterized. The mutations occurred in cis (double mutants) in two probands and in trans in one proband. Functional studies of all double mutants revealed inactivating kinetics. The previously reported GCK-MODY mutations R43H and G68D were inherited from an affected father and unaffected mother, respectively. Both our functional and genetic studies support R43H as the cause of GCK-MODY and G68D as a neutral rare variant. These data highlight the need for family/functional studies, even for previously reported pathogenic mutations.",2 4
"Prevalence and distribution of sarcomeric gene mutations in Japanese patients with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Actins Adult Aged Asian Continental Ancestry Group Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Carrier Proteins Female Geography Humans Japan MAP Kinase Kinase Kinases Male Middle Aged Myosin Heavy Chains Myosin Light Chains Pedigree Prevalence Sarcomeres Tropomyosin Troponin T Young Adult || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), which is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, is the most prevalent hereditary cardiac disease. Although there are several reports on the systematic screening of mutations in the disease-causing genes in European and American populations, only limited information is available for Asian populations, including Japanese. Genetic screening of disease-associated mutations in 8 genes for sarcomeric proteins, MYH7, MYBPC3, MYL2, MYL3, TNNT2, TNNI3, TPM1, and ACTC, was performed by direct sequencing in 112 unrelated Japanese proband patients with familial HCM; 37 different mutations, including 13 novel ones in 5 genes, MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNT2, TNNI3, and TPM1, were identified in 49 (43.8%) patients. Among them, 3 carried compound heterozygous mutations in MYBPC3 or TNNT2. The frequency of patients carrying the MYBPC3, MYH7, and TNNT2 mutations were 19.6%, 10.7%, and 8.9%, respectively, and the most frequently affected genes in the northeastern and southwestern parts of Japan were MYBPC3 and MYH7, respectively. Several mutations were found in multiple unrelated proband patients, for which the geographic distribution suggested founder effects of the mutations. This study demonstrated the frequency and distribution of mutations in a large cohort of familial HCM in Japan.",2 4
"Mutations in the human genes encoding the transcription factors of the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1 and HNF4 families: functional and pathological consequences. ||  || Mutations in the human genes encoding the tissue-specific transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1alpha, HNF1beta and HNF4alpha are responsible for maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY), a monogenic dominant inherited form of diabetes mellitus characterized by defective insulin secretion of the pancreatic beta-cells. In addition, the mutated HNF1beta gene causes defective development of the kidney and genital malformation. This review summarizes the main features of these transcription factors and discusses potential events leading to the specific disease phenotypes.",4
"The type and the position of HNF1A mutation modulate age at diagnosis of diabetes in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)-3. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Alternative Splicing Amino Acid Substitution Binding Sites Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Exons Genetic Variation Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Humans Middle Aged Mutation Mutation, Missense Sequence Deletion || The clinical expression of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)-3 is highly variable. This may be due to environmental and/or genetic factors, including molecular characteristics of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha (HNF1A) gene mutation. We analyzed the mutations identified in 356 unrelated MODY3 patients, including 118 novel mutations, and searched for correlations between the genotype and age at diagnosis of diabetes. Missense mutations prevailed in the dimerization and DNA-binding domains (74%), while truncating mutations were predominant in the transactivation domain (62%). The majority (83%) of the mutations were located in exons 1- 6, thus affecting the three HNF1A isoforms. Age at diagnosis of diabetes was lower in patients with truncating mutations than in those with missense mutations (18 vs. 22 years, P = 0.005). Missense mutations affecting the dimerization/DNA-binding domains were associated with a lower age at diagnosis than those affecting the transactivation domain (20 vs. 30 years, P = 10(-4)). Patients with missense mutations affecting the three isoforms were younger at diagnosis than those with missense mutations involving one or two isoforms (P = 0.03). These data show that part of the variability of the clinical expression in MODY3 patients may be explained by the type and the location of HNF1A mutations. These findings should be considered in studies for the search of additional modifier genetic factors.",4
"A short guide to hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. ||  || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is the only known predisposition syndrome dominated by carcinoma of the stomach and with a recognised genetic cause. Germline mutations in the E-cadherin gene (CDH1) co-segregate with the disease in about half of the families with multiple diffuse gastric cancer. In these families, identification of the CDH1 mutation allows for clinical measures to be taken. Importantly, clinical intervention is likely to be therapeutic and associated with tolerable morbidity. This review is thus aimed at providing a current overview of the clinical management and the underlying biology of HDGC.",4
"Clinical and Molecular Characterization of Infantile-Onset Pompe Disease in Mainland Chinese Patients: Identification of Two Common Mutations. || Alleles Asian Continental Ancestry Group China Female Gene Frequency Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction alpha-Glucosidases || We sought to understand the clinical course and molecular defects of infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD) among mainland Chinese patients. Twenty-five Chinese patients with IOPD were enrolled and clinical data were retrospectively reviewed. The entire coding region of the GAA gene was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and analyzed by direct sequencing. The median age at symptom onset was 3.4 months (range: 1.0-7.1 months) and 4.9 months (range: 2.7-8.3 months) at diagnosis. Only one patient received enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) and this child survived beyond the age of 2 years. Of the 24 patients not receiving ERT, all, but one patient, died at a median age of 8.3 months (range: 4.0-12.2 months). Thirteen novel and two common GAA mutations were identified in this study. The allelic frequency of c.2662G > T (p.Glu888X) was 23.1% in northern Chinese patients and 4.2% in southern Chinese patients, whereas the allelic frequency of c.1935C > A (p.Asp645Glu) was 20.8% in southern and 3.8% in northern Chinese patients. We identified the most common mutations in southern and northern Chinese patients with IOPD.",1 4
"Revisiting Li-Fraumeni Syndrome From TP53 Mutation Carriers. ||  || The aim of the study was to update the description of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a remarkable cancer predisposition characterized by extensive clinical heterogeneity. From 1,730 French patients suggestive of LFS, we identified 415 mutation carriers in 214 families harboring 133 distinct TP53 alterations and updated their clinical presentation. The 322 affected carriers developed 552 tumors, and 43% had developed multiple malignancies. The mean age of first tumor onset was 24.9 years, 41% having developed a tumor by age 18. In childhood, the LFS tumor spectrum was characterized by osteosarcomas, adrenocortical carcinomas (ACC), CNS tumors, and soft tissue sarcomas (STS) observed in 30%, 27%, 26%, and 23% of the patients, respectively. In adults, the tumor distribution was characterized by the predominance of breast carcinomas observed in 79% of the females, and STS observed in 27% of the patients. The TP53 mutation detection rate in children presenting with ACC or choroid plexus carcinomas, and in females with breast cancer before age 31 years, without additional features indicative of LFS, was 45%, 42% and 6%, respectively. The mean age of tumor onset was statistically different (P < .05) between carriers harboring dominant-negative missense mutations (21.3 years) and those with all types of loss of function mutations (28.5 years) or genomic rearrangements (35.8 years). Affected children, except those with ACC, harbored mostly dominant-negative missense mutations. The clinical gradient of the germline TP53 mutations, which should be validated by other studies, suggests that it might be appropriate to stratify the clinical management of LFS according to the class of the mutation.",4
Novel cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene missense mutations (R869C and R870C) that cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. ||  || ,4
"Genetic complexity in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy revealed by high-throughput sequencing. || Adult Amino Acid Substitution Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Female High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Sarcomeres || Clinical interpretation of the large number of rare variants identified by high throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies is challenging. The aim of this study was to explore the clinical implications of a HTS strategy for patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) using a targeted HTS methodology and workflow developed for patients with a range of inherited cardiovascular diseases. By comparing the sequencing results with published findings and with sequence data from a large-scale exome sequencing screen of UK individuals, we sought to quantify the strength of the evidence supporting causality for detected candidate variants. 223 unrelated patients with HCM (46±15 years at diagnosis, 74% males) were studied. In order to analyse coding, intronic and regulatory regions of 41 cardiovascular genes, we used solution-based sequence capture followed by massive parallel resequencing on Illumina GAIIx. Average read-depth in the 2.1 Mb target region was 120. Rare (frequency<0.5%) non-synonymous, loss-of-function and splice-site variants were defined as candidates. Excluding titin, we identified 152 distinct candidate variants in sarcomeric or associated genes (89 novel) in 143 patients (64%). Four sarcomeric genes (MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNI3, TNNT2) showed an excess of rare single non-synonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) in cases compared to controls. The estimated probability that a nsSNP in these genes is pathogenic varied between 57% and near certainty depending on the location. We detected an additional 94 candidate variants (73 novel) in desmosomal, and ion-channel genes in 96 patients (43%). This study provides the first large-scale quantitative analysis of the prevalence of sarcomere protein gene variants in patients with HCM using HTS technology. Inclusion of other genes implicated in inherited cardiac disease identifies a large number of non-synonymous rare variants of unknown clinical significance.",4
"Sarcomeric hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: genetic profile in a Portuguese population. || Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Female Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Portugal Sarcomeres Young Adult || Sarcomeric hypertrophic cardiomyopathy has heterogeneous phenotypic expressions, of which sudden cardiac death is the most feared. A genetic diagnosis is essential to identify subjects at risk in each family. The spectrum of disease-causing mutations in the Portuguese population is unknown. Seventy-seven unrelated probands with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were systematically screened for mutations by PCR and sequencing of five sarcomeric genes: MYBPC3, MYH7, TNNT2, TNNI3 and MYL2. Familial cosegregation analysis was performed in most patients. Thirty-four different mutations were identified in 41 (53%) index patients, 71% with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The most frequently involved gene was MYBPC3 (66%) with 22 different mutations (8 novel) in 27 patients, followed by MYH7 (22%), TNNT2 (12%) and TNNI3 (2.6%). In three patients (7%), two mutations were found in MYBPC3 and/or MYH7. Additionally, 276 relatives were screened, leading to the identification of a mean of three other affected relatives for each pedigree with the familial form of the disease. Disease-associated mutations were identified mostly in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, corroborating the idea that rarely studied genes may be implicated in sporadic forms. Private mutations are the rule, MYBPC3 being the most commonly involved gene. Mutations in MYBPC3 and MYH7 accounted for most cases of sarcomere-related disease. Multiple mutations in these genes may occur, which highlights the importance of screening both. The detection of novel mutations strongly suggests that all coding regions should be systematically screened. Genotyping in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy enables a more precise diagnosis of the disease, with implications for risk stratification and genetic counseling.",4
"Comprehensive analysis of the beta-myosin heavy chain gene in 389 unrelated patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Child, Preschool Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Female Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Medical Records Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic Risk Assessment Ventricular Myosins || We sought to determine the prevalence and phenotype of beta-myosin heavy chain gene MYH7 mutations in a large cohort of unrelated patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a heterogeneous cardiac disease. MYH7 mutations are one of the most common genetic causes of HCM and have been associated with severe hypertrophy, young age of diagnosis, and high risk of sudden cardiac death. However, these clinical findings from large, family studies have not been confirmed in a large unrelated cohort. Deoxyribonucleic (DNA) samples obtained from 389 HCM outpatients seen at this tertiary referral center were analyzed for mutations, using polymerase chain reaction, denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography, and DNA sequencing for all 38 protein-coding exons of MYH7. Clinical data were extracted from patient records blinded to patient genotype. Fifty-eight patients (15%) harbored 40 different mutations in MYH7. Compared with HCM patients without MYH7 mutations, HCM patients with MYH7 were younger at diagnosis (32.9 vs. 42.7 years, p = 0.0002), had more hypertrophy (left ventricular wall thickness of 24.2 vs. 21.1 mm, p = 0.0009), and more frequently underwent myectomy (60% vs. 38%, p = 0.002). The HCM patients with MYH7 mutations more often had a family history of HCM (43% vs. 29%, p = 0.006), but there was no difference in family history of sudden death (16% vs. 14%, p = NS). In this setting, HCM patients with MYH7 were diagnosed at a younger age and had more hypertrophy, but they had no greater frequency of sudden death among first-degree relatives. Although these associations may prove useful for targeted gene screening, caution should be exercised in terms of using pathogenic status in risk stratification.",4
"Mutations in the sarcomere gene MYH7 in Ebstein anomaly. || Adolescent Adult Aged Amino Acid Sequence Cardiac Myosins Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Ebstein Anomaly Family Female Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Sarcomeres Ultrasonography Young Adult || Ebstein anomaly is a rare congenital heart malformation characterized by adherence of the septal and posterior leaflets of the tricuspid valve to the underlying myocardium. An association between Ebstein anomaly with left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC) and mutations in MYH7 encoding β-myosin heavy chain has been shown; in this report, we have screened for MYH7 mutations in a cohort of probands with Ebstein anomaly in a large population-based study. Mutational analysis in a cohort of 141 unrelated probands with Ebstein anomaly was performed by next-generation sequencing and direct DNA sequencing of MYH7. Heterozygous mutations were identified in 8 of 141 samples (6%). Seven distinct mutations were found; 5 were novel and 2 were known to cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. All mutations except for 1 3-bp deletion were missense mutations; 1 was a de novo change. Mutation-positive probands and family members showed various congenital heart malformations as well as LVNC. Among 8 mutation-positive probands, 6 had LVNC, whereas among 133 mutation-negative probands, none had LVNC. The frequency of MYH7 mutations was significantly different between probands with and without LVNC accompanying Ebstein anomaly (P<0.0001). LVNC segregated with the MYH7 mutation in the pedigrees of 3 of the probands, 1 of which also included another individual with Ebstein anomaly. Ebstein anomaly is a congenital heart malformation that is associated with mutations in MYH7. MYH7 mutations are predominantly found in Ebstein anomaly associated with LVNC and may warrant genetic testing and family evaluation in this subset of patients.",4
"A pharmacogenetic approach to identify mutant forms of α-galactosidase A that respond to a pharmacological chaperone for Fabry disease. || 1-Deoxynojirimycin Biological Assay Enzyme Activation Fabry Disease Gene Expression Regulation HEK293 Cells Humans Leukocytes, Mononuclear Male Mutant Proteins Point Mutation Protein Conformation alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is caused by mutations in the gene (GLA) that encodes α-galactosidase A (α-Gal A). The iminosugar AT1001 (GR181413A, migalastat hydrochloride, 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin) is a pharmacological chaperone that selectively binds and stabilizes α-Gal A, increasing total cellular levels and activity for some mutant forms (defined as ""responsive""). In this study, we developed a cell-based assay in cultured HEK-293 cells to identify mutant forms of α-Gal A that are responsive to AT1001. Concentration-dependent increases in α-Gal A activity in response to AT1001 were shown for 49 (60%) of 81 mutant forms. The responses of α-Gal A mutant forms were generally consistent with the responses observed in male Fabry patient-derived lymphoblasts. Importantly, the HEK-293 cell responses of 19 α-Gal A mutant forms to a clinically achievable concentration of AT1001 (10 µM) were generally consistent with observed increases in α-Gal A activity in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from male Fabry patients orally administered AT1001 during Phase 2 clinical studies. This indicates that the cell-based responses can identify mutant forms of α-Gal A that are likely to respond to AT1001 in vivo. Thus, the HEK-293 cell-based assay may be a useful aid in the identification of Fabry patients with AT1001-responsive mutant forms.",4 0
"A molecular basis for familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a beta cardiac myosin heavy chain gene missense mutation. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Blotting, Southern Cardiomegaly DNA DNA Probes Exons Female Genes Genomic Library Humans Macromolecular Substances Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Myocardium Myosin Subfragments Oligonucleotide Probes Pedigree Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Restriction Mapping Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid || A point mutation in exon 13 of the beta cardiac myosin heavy chain (MHC) gene is present in all individuals affected with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) from a large kindred. This missense mutation converts a highly conserved arginine residue (Arg-403) to a glutamine. Affected individuals from an unrelated family lack this missense mutation, but instead have an alpha/beta cardiac MHC hybrid gene. Identification of two unique mutations within cardiac MHC genes in all individuals with FHC from two unrelated families demonstrates that defects in the cardiac MHC genes can cause this disease. The pathology resulting from a missense mutation at residue 403 further suggests that a critical function of myosin is disrupted by this mutation.",2 4
"High frequency of germline TP53 mutations in a prospective adult-onset sarcoma cohort. || Adult Age of Onset Base Sequence Cohort Studies Female Germ-Line Mutation Humans Kaplan-Meier Estimate Male Middle Aged Pedigree Prospective Studies Sarcoma Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Sarcomas are a key feature of Li-Fraumeni and related syndromes (LFS/LFL), associated with germline TP53 mutations. Current penetrance estimates for TP53 mutations are subject to significant ascertainment bias. The International Sarcoma Kindred Study is a clinic-based, prospective cohort of adult-onset sarcoma cases, without regard to family history. The entire cohort was screened for mutations in TP53 using high-resolution melting analysis and Sanger sequencing, and multiplex-ligation-dependent probe amplification and targeted massively parallel sequencing for copy number changes. Pathogenic TP53 mutations were detected in blood DNA of 20/559 sarcoma probands (3.6%); 17 were germline and 3 appeared to be somatically acquired. Of the germline carriers, one appeared to be mosaic, detectable in the tumor and blood, but not epithelial tissues. Germline mutation carriers were more likely to have multiple cancers (47% vs 15% for non-carriers, P = 3.0×10(-3)), and earlier cancer onset (33 vs 48 years, P = 1.19×10(-3)). The median survival of mutation carriers following first cancer diagnosis was not significantly different from non-carriers. Only 10/17 (59%) pedigrees met classical or Chompret criteria for LFS. In summary, germline TP53 mutations are not rare in adult patients with sarcoma, with implications for screening, surveillance, treatment and genetic counselling of carriers and family members.",4
"Biochemical and imaging surveillance in germline TP53 mutation carriers with Li-Fraumeni syndrome: a prospective observational study. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Female Germ-Line Mutation Heterozygote Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Middle Aged Prospective Studies Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome have a high lifetime risk of developing cancer. We assessed the feasibility and potential clinical effect of a comprehensive surveillance protocol in asymptomatic TP53 mutation carriers in families with this syndrome. We implemented a clinical surveillance protocol, using frequent biochemical and imaging studies, for asymptomatic TP53 mutation carriers on Jan 1, 2004, and did a prospective observational study of members of eight families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome who either chose to undergo surveillance or chose not to undergo surveillance. The primary outcome measure was detection of new cancers. The secondary outcome measure was overall survival. As of Nov 1, 2010, 33 TP53 mutation carriers were identified, 18 of whom underwent surveillance. The surveillance protocol detected ten asymptomatic tumours in seven patients, including small, high-grade tumours and low-grade or premalignant tumours. All seven mutation carriers were alive after a median follow-up of 24 months (IQR 22-65 months). 12 high-grade, high-stage tumours developed in 10 individuals in the non-surveillance group, two of whom (20%) were alive at the end of follow-up (p=0·0417 for comparison with survival in the surveillance group). 3-year overall survival was 100% in the surveillance group and 21% (95% CI 4-48%) in the non-surveillance group (p=0·0155). Our findings show the feasibility of a clinical surveillance protocol for the detection of asymptomatic neoplasms in individuals with germline TP53 mutations. This strategy offers a management option for affected individuals, and its benefits lend support to the use of early genetic testing of at-risk individuals and families. Canadian Cancer Society Research Institute, Canadian Institutes of Health Research, SickKids Foundation, and Soccer for Hope.",2 4
"New population-based exome data are questioning the pathogenicity of previously cardiomyopathy-associated genetic variants. || Cardiomyopathies Case-Control Studies Codon, Nonsense Exome False Positive Reactions Gene Frequency Genetic Association Studies Genotype High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Mutation, Missense Sequence Analysis, DNA || Cardiomyopathies are a heterogeneous group of diseases with various etiologies. We focused on three genetically determined cardiomyopathies: hypertrophic (HCM), dilated (DCM), and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC). Eighty-four genes have so far been associated with these cardiomyopathies, but the disease-causing effect of reported variants is often dubious. In order to identify possible false-positive variants, we investigated the prevalence of previously reported cardiomyopathy-associated variants in recently published exome data. We searched for reported missense and nonsense variants in the NHLBI-Go Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) containing exome data from 6500 individuals. In ESP, we identified 94 variants out of 687 (14%) variants previously associated with HCM, 58 out of 337 (17%) variants associated with DCM, and 38 variants out of 209 (18%) associated with ARVC. These findings correspond to a genotype prevalence of 1:4 for HCM, 1:6 for DCM, and 1:5 for ARVC. PolyPhen-2 predictions were conducted on all previously published cardiomyopathy-associated missense variants. We found significant overrepresentation of variants predicted as being benign among those present in ESP compared with the ones not present. In order to validate our findings, seven variants associated with cardiomyopathy were genotyped in a control population and this revealed frequencies comparable with the ones found in ESP. In conclusion, we identified genotype prevalences up to more than one thousand times higher than expected from the phenotype prevalences in the general population (HCM 1:500, DCM 1:2500, and ARVC 1:5000) and our data suggest that a high number of these variants are not monogenic causes of cardiomyopathy.",4
"Development of a high resolution melting method for the detection of genetic variations in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Freezing Genetic Variation Humans Nucleic Acid Denaturation Sequence Analysis, DNA || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common genetic cardiac disease affecting 1 in 500 people. Due to large cohorts to investigate, the number of disease-causing genes, the size of the 2 prevalent mutated genes, and the presence of a large spectrum of private mutations, mutational screening must be performed using an extremely sensitive and specific scanning method. High Resolution Melting (HRM) analysis was developed for prevalent HCM-causing genes (MYBPC3, MYH7, TNNT2, and TNNI3) using control DNAs and DNAs carrying previously identified gene variants. A cohort of 34 HCM patients was further blindly screened. To evaluate HRM sensitivity, this cohort was also screened using an optimized DHPLC methodology. All gene variants detected by DHPLC were also readily identified as abnormal by HRM analysis. Mutational screening of a cohort of 34 HCM cases led to identification of 19 mutated alleles. Complete molecular investigation was completed two times faster and cheaper than using DHPLC strategy. HRM analysis represents an inexpensive, highly sensitive and high-throughput method to allow identification of mutations in the coding sequences of prevalent HCM genes. Identification of more HCM mutations will provide new insights into genotype/phenotype relationships and will allow a better knowledge of the HCM physiopathology.",4
"Germline mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in children with osteosarcoma. ||  || We investigated the possibility that a significant proportion of children with osteosarcoma harbor germline mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene and, therefore, this subgroup of pediatric cancer patients should be considered for large-scale predictive testing. Genomic DNA extracted from peripheral-blood leukocytes from 235 unselected children with osteosarcoma from 33 institutions were screened for the presence of germline p53 mutations using constant denaturant gel electrophoresis (CDGE). Exons 5 through 8 were evaluated in all patients and exon 2 and exon 9 were analyzed in 59 and 95 patients, respectively. Those samples that showed aberrant migration on CDGE were sequenced or analyzed by restriction enzyme digestion of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products to confirm the nature of the gene alteration. In 18 samples, CDGE showed fragments of the p53 gene with altered electrophoretic mobilities compared with wild-type p53. DNA sequencing showed that 11 samples had an identical, previously described polymorphism. The other seven contained heterozygous p53 mutations located in exon 5 (n = 3), exon 6 (n = 1), exon 7 (n = 1), and exon 8 (n = 2). Six alterations were missense mutations and one was a nonsense mutation. Three of these patients had first-degree relatives with cancer. One of these three kindreds had a family history consistent with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). We identified germline p53 mutations in seven of 235 (3.0%) children with osteosarcoma. Four of these mutations were found in patients who did not have first-degree relatives with cancer. Although genetic transmission of the altered p53 gene could not be tested in this survey because of how it was designed, it is possible that predictive testing for p53 mutations could identify unaffected relatives of gene carriers who also have a high risk for the development of cancer. This study provides evidence for the importance of considering children with osteosarcoma for predictive testing for germline p53 mutations.",3 4
"Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer Syndrome: CDH1 Mutations and Beyond. ||  || E-cadherin (CDH1) is a cancer predisposition gene mutated in families meeting clinically defined hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). Reliable estimates of cancer risk and spectrum in germline mutation carriers are essential for management. For families without CDH1 mutations, genetic-based risk stratification has not been possible, resulting in limited clinical options. To derive accurate estimates of gastric and breast cancer risks in CDH1 mutation carriers and determine if germline mutations in other genes are associated with HDGC. Testing for CDH1 germline mutations was performed on 183 index cases meeting clinical criteria for HDGC. Penetrance was derived from 75 mutation-positive families from within this and other cohorts, comprising 3858 probands (353 with gastric cancer and 89 with breast cancer). Germline DNA from 144 HDGC probands lacking CDH1 mutations was screened using multiplexed targeted sequencing for 55 cancer-associated genes. Accurate estimates of gastric and breast cancer risks in CDH1 mutation carriers and the relative contribution of other cancer predisposition genes in familial gastric cancers. Thirty-one distinct pathogenic CDH1 mutations (14 novel) were identified in 34 of 183 index cases (19%). By the age of 80 years, the cumulative incidence of gastric cancer was 70% (95% CI, 59%-80%) for males and 56% (95% CI, 44%-69%) for females, and the risk of breast cancer for females was 42% (95% CI, 23%-68%). In CDH1 mutation-negative index cases, candidate mutations were identified in 16 of 144 probands (11%), including mutations within genes of high and moderate penetrance: CTNNA1, BRCA2, STK11, SDHB, PRSS1, ATM, MSR1, and PALB2. This is the largest reported series of CDH1 mutation carriers, providing more precise estimates of age-associated risks of gastric and breast cancer that will improve counseling of unaffected carriers. In HDGC families lacking CDH1 mutations, testing of CTNNA1 and other tumor suppressor genes should be considered. Clinically defined HDGC families can harbor mutations in genes (ie, BRCA2) with different clinical ramifications from CDH1. Therefore, we propose that HDGC syndrome may be best defined by mutations in CDH1 and closely related genes, rather than through clinical criteria that capture families with heterogeneous susceptibility profiles.",2 4 3
"Clinical and functional relevance of melanocortin-4 receptor variants in obese German children. ||  || Variants in the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) gene are the most frequent cause of monogenic obesity. The relevance of MC4R variations with respect to clinical phenotype and biochemical function remains controversial. We sequenced the MC4R gene in 510 overweight/obese children. The clinical phenotype was assessed in a case-control setting matched for age, gender, puberty and body mass index. Identified MC4R variants were functionally characterized in vitro. The frequency of MC4R variants was 5.3%, with functionally relevant mutations (D(90)N, V(103)I/S(127)L, R(165)W, G(181)D) occurring in 1.2% (confidence interval 0.26-2.15) of our sample. 4.1% were carriers of variants (Y(35)Y, V(103)I, T(112)M, M(200)V, I(251)L) with preserved receptor function in vitro. We did not detect large heterozygous deletions by multiple-ligand probe amplification assay. There were no differences in anthropometric or metabolic parameters between children with loss-of-function mutations and noncarriers. Carriers of the V(103)I or I(251)L variant had higher high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and HbA1c levels than matched noncarriers of MC4R variants. In our data set of childhood obesity in central Germany, we identified functionally relevant mutations in the MC4R gene in only 1.2% of the children. There were no major significant phenotypic differences between obese children with and without MC4R mutations. Hence, the diagnosis of genetically caused obesity due to MC4R mutation should be made with caution.",4
"Sensitivity of whole exome sequencing in detecting infantile- and late-onset Pompe disease. || Diagnosis, Differential Enzyme Replacement Therapy Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Late Onset Disorders Mutation Phenotype Sensitivity and Specificity Whole Exome Sequencing alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is a metabolic myopathy with a wide spectrum of clinical presentation. The gold-standard diagnostic test is acid alpha-glucosidase assay on skin fibroblasts, muscle or blood. Identification of two GAA pathogenic variants in-trans is confirmatory. Optimal effectiveness of enzyme replacement therapy hinges on early diagnosis, which is challenging in late-onset form of the disease due to non-specific presentation. Next-generation sequencing-based panels effectively facilitate diagnosis, but the sensitivity of whole-exome sequencing (WES) in detecting pathogenic GAA variants remains unknown. We analyzed WES data from 93 patients with confirmed Pompe disease and GAA genotypes based on PCR/Sanger sequencing. After ensuring that the common intronic variant c.-32-13T>G is not filtered out, whole-exome sequencing identified both GAA pathogenic variants in 77/93 (83%) patients. However, one variant was missed in 14/93 (15%), and both variants were missed in 2/93 (2%). One complex indel leading to a severe phenotype was incorrectly called a nonsynonymous substitution c.-32-13T>C due to misalignment. These results demonstrate that WES may fail to diagnose Pompe disease. Clinicians need to be aware of limitations of WES, and consider tests specific to Pompe disease when WES does not provide a diagnosis in patients with proximal myopathy, progressive respiratory failure or other subtle symptoms.",1 4
"Identification and functional characterisation of novel glucokinase mutations causing maturity-onset diabetes of the young in Slovakia. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Enzyme Stability Female Genetic Testing Genotype Glucokinase Heterozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Pedigree Phenotype Slovakia || Heterozygous glucokinase (GCK) mutations cause a subtype of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (GCK-MODY). Over 600 GCK mutations have been reported of which ∼65% are missense. In many cases co-segregation has not been established and despite the importance of functional studies in ascribing pathogenicity for missense variants these have only been performed for <10% of mutations. The aim of this study was to determine the minimum prevalence of GCK-MODY amongst diabetic subjects in Slovakia by sequencing GCK in 100 Slovakian probands with a phenotype consistent with GCK-MODY and to explore the pathogenicity of identified variants through family and functional studies. Twenty-two mutations were identified in 36 families (17 missense) of which 7 (I110N, V200A, N204D, G258R, F419S, c.580-2A>C, c.1113-1114delGC) were novel. Parental DNA was available for 22 probands (covering 14/22 mutations) and co-segregation established in all cases. Bioinformatic analysis predicted all missense mutations to be damaging. Nine (I110N, V200A, N204D, G223S, G258R, F419S, V244G, L315H, I436N) mutations were functionally evaluated. Basic kinetic analysis explained pathogenicity for 7 mutants which showed reduced glucokinase activity with relative activity indices (RAI) between 0.6 to <0.001 compared to wild-type GCK (1.0). For the remaining 2 mutants additional molecular mechanisms were investigated. Differences in glucokinase regulatory protein (GKRP) -mediated-inhibition of GCK were observed for both L315H & I436N when compared to wild type (IC(50) 14.6±0.1 mM & 20.3±1.6 mM vs.13.3±0.1 mM respectively [p<0.03]). Protein instability as assessed by thermal lability studies demonstrated that both L315H and I436N show marked thermal instability compared to wild-type GCK (RAI at 55°C 8.8±0.8% & 3.1±0.4% vs. 42.5±3.9% respectively [p<0.001]). The minimum prevalence of GCK-MODY amongst Slovakian patients with diabetes was 0.03%. In conclusion, we have identified 22 GCK mutations in 36 Slovakian probands and demonstrate that combining family, bioinformatic and functional studies can aid the interpretation of variants identified by molecular diagnostic screening.",4
"Molecular characterization of familial hypercholesterolemia in Spain: identification of 39 novel and 77 recurrent mutations in LDLR. ||  || Mutations in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene cause familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), an autosomal dominant inherited disorder associated with an increased risk of premature atherosclerosis. The aim of this study was to characterize the LDLR mutations in a group of 476 apparently non-related Spanish FH patients. The promoter region and the 18 exons with their flanking intron sequences of the LDLR gene were screened by PCR-SSCP analysis and DNA sequencing. In addition, we tested for the presence of the mutation p.R3500Q in the gene coding for apolipoprotein B-100 (apo B-100). We found 77 mutations previously described, and 39 novel mutations affecting the LDLR gene: 8 missense, 5 nonsense, 15 frameshift, 5 splicing, 4 in frame, one nucleotide change in the non-coding sequence of exon 1, and one silent variant. We have identified al least one of these LDLR gene mutations in 329 subjects (69%). Four patients were homozygous, 4 patients were compound heterozygous, 48 patients were found to carry two different sequence variants in the same allele and 4 patients carried three different sequence variants in the same allele. Additionally, 4 subjects were carriers of the p.R3500Q mutation in the apo B gene. All of these findings indicate that there is a broad spectrum of mutations and sequence variants in the LDLR gene causing FH in Spain.",3 4
"The identification and management of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer in a large Jordanian family. || Adolescent Adult Aged Antigens, CD Cadherins Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Counseling Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Jordan Male Middle Aged Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary Pedigree Stomach Neoplasms || The management of families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer is challenging as screening for cancer in CDH1 mutation carriers is insufficiently sensitive and the commonly recommended option, prophylactic total gastrectomy, is associated with certain morbidity and even potential mortality. We describe the particular challenges associated with the diagnosis and management of a large Jordanian family with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. A preliminary pedigree enabled DNA testing for CDH1 mutation, denoted as c.1137G → A, on 4 family members; all were identified as mutation carriers. A family information service was then conducted in Amman, Jordan, where 40 family members gathered and we provided education and counseling. Signed permission enabled DNA collection for CDH1 germline mutation studies. Non-attendees were contacted and provided detailed information. Twenty-three family members have been tested for CDH1; 13 were positive and 10 were negative. The proband, a CDH1 mutation carrier, has undergone successful prophylactic total gastrectomy. We are hopeful that this model can be repeated throughout Jordan as well as other emerging countries where knowledge and action about hereditary cancer is lacking.",3 4
"BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in women of different ethnicities undergoing testing for hereditary breast-ovarian cancer. || Adult African Continental Ancestry Group Age Factors Asian Continental Ancestry Group Breast Neoplasms European Continental Ancestry Group Family Health Female Genes, BRCA1 Genes, BRCA2 Humans Latin America Middle Aged Middle East Minority Health Mutation || In women at increased risk for breast and ovarian cancer, the identification of a mutation in breast cancer gene 1 (BRCA1) and BRCA2 has important implications for screening and prevention counseling. Uncertainty regarding the role of BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing in high-risk women from diverse ancestral backgrounds exists because of variability in prevalence estimates of deleterious (disease-associated) mutations in non-white populations. In this study, the authors examined the prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in an ethnically diverse group of women who were referred for genetic testing. In this cross-sectional analysis, the prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations was assessed in a group of non-Ashkenazi Jewish women who underwent genetic testing. From 1996 to 2006, 46,276 women who met study criteria underwent DNA full-sequence analysis of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Deleterious mutations were identified in 12.5% of women, and recurrent deleterious mutations (prevalence >2%) were identified in all ancestral groups. Women of non-European descent were younger (mean age, 45.9 years; standard deviation [SD], 11.6 years) than European women (mean age, 50 years; SD, 11.9 years; P < .001). Women of African (15.6%; odds ratio [OR], 1.3 [95% confidence interval (95% CI), 1.1-1.5]) and Latin American (14.8%; OR, 1.2 [95% CI, 1.1-1.4]) ancestries had a significantly higher prevalence of deleterious BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations compared with women of Western European ancestry (12.1%), primarily because of an increased prevalence of BRCA1 mutations in those 2 groups. Non-European ethnicity was associated strongly with having a variant of uncertain significance; however, reclassification decreased variant reporting (from 12.8%-->5.9%), and women of African ancestry experienced the largest decline (58%). Mutation prevalence was found to be high among women who were referred for clinical BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing, and the risk was similar across diverse ethnicities. BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing is integral to cancer risk assessment in all high-risk women.",4
"Germline variation in cancer-susceptibility genes in a healthy, ancestrally diverse cohort: implications for individual genome sequencing. || Adolescent Adult Alleles Cohort Studies Female Gene Frequency Gene Pool Genes, Neoplasm Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genome, Human Germ-Line Mutation Health Humans Male Middle Aged Models, Molecular Neoplasms Open Reading Frames Phylogeny Sequence Analysis, DNA Young Adult || Technological advances coupled with decreasing costs are bringing whole genome and whole exome sequencing closer to routine clinical use. One of the hurdles to clinical implementation is the high number of variants of unknown significance. For cancer-susceptibility genes, the difficulty in interpreting the clinical relevance of the genomic variants is compounded by the fact that most of what is known about these variants comes from the study of highly selected populations, such as cancer patients or individuals with a family history of cancer. The genetic variation in known cancer-susceptibility genes in the general population has not been well characterized to date. To address this gap, we profiled the nonsynonymous genomic variation in 158 genes causally implicated in carcinogenesis using high-quality whole genome sequences from an ancestrally diverse cohort of 681 healthy individuals. We found that all individuals carry multiple variants that may impact cancer susceptibility, with an average of 68 variants per individual. Of the 2,688 allelic variants identified within the cohort, most are very rare, with 75% found in only 1 or 2 individuals in our population. Allele frequencies vary between ancestral groups, and there are 21 variants for which the minor allele in one population is the major allele in another. Detailed analysis of a selected subset of 5 clinically important cancer genes, BRCA1, BRCA2, KRAS, TP53, and PTEN, highlights differences between germline variants and reported somatic mutations. The dataset can serve a resource of genetic variation in cancer-susceptibility genes in 6 ancestry groups, an important foundation for the interpretation of cancer risk from personal genome sequences.",4
"Mutations in the genes encoding the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha and 4 alpha in maturity-onset diabetes of the young and hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. || Animals Base Sequence Chromosome Aberrations CpG Islands DNA Primers Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Disease Models, Animal Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4 Humans Hyperinsulinism Hypoglycemia Mutation Polymorphism, Genetic || Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic disorder characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance of young-onset (typically <25 years), noninsulin-dependent diabetes due to defective insulin secretion. MODY is both clinically and genetically heterogeneous with mutations in at least 10 genes. Mutations in the HNF1A gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha are the most common cause of MODY in most adult populations studied. The number of different pathogenic HNF1A mutations totals 414 in 1,247 families. Mutations in the HNF4A gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha are a rarer cause of MODY with 103 different mutations reported in 173 families to date. Sensitivity to treatment with sulfonylurea tablets is a feature of both HNF1A and HNF4A mutations. The HNF4A MODY phenotype has been expanded by the reports of macrosomia in ∼50% of babies, and more rarely, neonatal hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. The identification of an HNF1A or HNF4A gene mutation has important implications for clinical management in diabetes and pregnancy, but MODY is significantly underdiagnosed. Current research is focused on identifying biomarkers and developing probability models to identify those patients most likely to have MODY, until next generation sequencing technology enables cost-effective gene analysis for all patients with young onset diabetes.",4
"BAG3 myofibrillar myopathy presenting with cardiomyopathy. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adult Apoptosis Regulatory Proteins Cardiomyopathies Heart Transplantation Humans Male Muscle, Skeletal Mutation, Missense Myopathies, Structural, Congenital Neural Conduction Sural Nerve Young Adult || Myofibrillar myopathies (MFMs) are a heterogeneous group of neuromuscular disorders distinguished by the pathological hallmark of myofibrillar dissolution. Most patients present in adulthood, but mutations in several genes including BCL2-associated athanogene 3 (BAG3) cause predominantly childhood-onset disease. BAG3-related MFM is particularly severe, featuring weakness, cardiomyopathy, neuropathy, and early lethality. While prior cases reported either neuromuscular weakness or concurrent weakness and cardiomyopathy at onset, we describe the first case in which cardiomyopathy and cardiac transplantation (age eight) preceded neuromuscular weakness by several years (age 12). The phenotype comprised distal weakness and severe sensorimotor neuropathy. Nerve biopsy was primarily axonal with secondary demyelinating/remyelinating changes without ""giant axons."" Muscle biopsy showed extensive neuropathic changes that made myopathic changes difficult to interpret. Similar to previous cases, a p.Pro209Leu mutation in exon 3 of BAG3 was found. This case underlines the importance of evaluating for MFMs in patients with combined neuromuscular weakness and cardiomyopathy.",4
"The TP53 mutation, R337H, is associated with Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndromes in Brazilian families. || Base Sequence Brazil DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Mutation, Missense Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || A TP53 germline mutation, R337H, has been previously described in children from southern Brazil with adrenocortical tumours but no documented familial history of other cancers. Here, we have screened for TP53 mutation 45 Brazilian unrelated individuals with family histories fulfilling the clinical definitions of Li-Fraumeni (LFS) or Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) syndromes. Mutations were found in 13 patients (28.9%), including six (46.1%) R337H mutations, and four novel germline mutations (V173M, V197M, G244D and IVS6+1G>T). Families with the R337H mutation presented a wide spectrum of tumours, including breast cancers (30.4%), brain cancers (10.7%), soft tissue sarcomas (10.7%) and adrenocortical carcinomas (8.9%). Testing of 53 Brazilian subjects with no cancer history showed that R337H was not a common polymorphism in that population. Moreover, loss of heterozygocity with retention of the R337H allele was observed in a breast adenocarcinoma, supporting a role for this mutation in breast tumorigenesis. These results show that the TP53 R337H germline mutation predisposes to a larger spectrum of tumours, similar to the one reported for other TP53 mutations.",3 4
"GJB2: the spectrum of deafness-causing allele variants and their phenotype. ||  || Genetic testing was completed on 1,294 persons with deafness referred to the Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories to establish a diagnosis of DFNB1. Exon 2 of GJB2 was screened for coding sequence allele variants by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) complemented by bidirectional sequencing. If two deafness-causing mutations of GJB2 (encoding Connexin 26) were identified, further screening was not performed. If only a single deafness-causing mutation was identified, we screened for the g.1777179_2085947del (hereafter called del(GJB6-D13S1830); GenBank NT_024524.13) and mutations in the noncoding region of GJB2. Phenotype-genotype correlations were evaluated by categorizing mutations as either protein truncating or nontruncating. A total of 205 persons carried two GJB2 exon 2 mutations and were diagnosed as having DFNB1; 100 persons carried only a single deafness-causing allele variant of exon 2. A total of 37 of these persons were c.35delG carriers, and 51 carried other allele variants of GJB2. Persons diagnosed with DFNB1 segregating two truncating/nonsense mutations had a more severe phenotype than persons carrying two missense mutations, with mean hearing impairments being 88 and 37%, respectively (P < 0.05). The number of deaf c.35delG carriers was greater than expected when compared to the c.35delG carrier frequency in normal-hearing controls (P < 0.05), suggesting the existence of at least one other mutation outside the GJB2 coding region that does not complement GJB2 deafness-causing allele variants.",4
"Prevalence and age-dependence of malignant mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain and troponin T genes in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a comprehensive outpatient perspective. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Female Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Ventricular Myosins || The goal of this study was to determine the prevalence of ""malignant"" mutations in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Previous genotype-phenotype studies have implicated four mutations (R403Q, R453C, G716R and R719W) as highly malignant defects in the beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH7). In the cardiac troponin T gene (TNNT2), a specific mutation (R92W) has been associated with high risk of sudden death. Routine clinical screening for these malignant mutations has been suggested to identify high-risk individuals. We screened 293 unrelated individuals with HCM seen at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, between April 1997 and October 2000. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was obtained after informed consent; amplification of MYH7 exons 13 (R403Q), 14 (R453C) and 19 (G716R and R719W), and TNNT2 exon 9 (R92W) was performed by polymerase chain reaction. The mutations were detected using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and automated DNA sequencing. The mean age at diagnosis was 42 years with 53 patients diagnosed before age 25. The mean maximal left ventricular wall thickness was 21 mm. Nearly one-third of cases were familial and one-fourth had a family history of sudden cardiac death. Only 3 of the 293 patients possessed one of the five ""malignant"" mutations, and all 3 patients were <25 years of age at presentation (p < 0.006). This finding underscores the profound genetic heterogeneity in HCM. Only 1% of unrelated individuals seen at a tertiary referral center for HCM possessed one of the five ""malignant"" mutations that were examined. Routine clinical testing for these specific mutations is of low yield.",4
"GJB2 and GJB6 mutations are an infrequent cause of autosomal-recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss in residents of Mexico. || Adolescent Base Sequence Child Child, Preschool Connexin 26 Connexin 30 Connexins Deafness Female Gene Frequency Humans Infant Male Mexico Mutation Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction || Mutations in the DFNB1 locus are the most common cause of autosomal-recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) worldwide. The aim of this study was to identify the most frequent mutations in patients with ARNSHL who reside in Northeastern Mexico. We determined the nucleotide sequence the coding region of GJB2 of 78 patients with ARNSHL. Polymerase chain reaction assays were used to detect the GJB2 IVS1+1G>A mutation and deletions within GJB6. GJB2 mutations were detected in 9.6% of the alleles, and c.35delG was the most frequent. Six other less-frequent mutations were detected, including an extremely rare variant (c.645_648delTAGA), a novel mutation (c.35G>A), and one of possible Mexican origin (c.34G>T). GJB6 deletions and GJB2 IVS1+1G>A were not detected. These data suggest that mutations in the DFNB1 locus are a rare cause of ARNSHL among the population of Northeastern Mexico. This confirms the genetic heterogeneity of this condition and indicates that further research is required to determine the other mechanisms of pathogenesis of ARNSHL in Mexicans.",4
"Cognitive characteristics of PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes. || Adolescent Adult Case-Control Studies Child, Preschool Cognition Female Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Mental Recall Middle Aged Neuropsychological Tests PTEN Phosphohydrolase Reference Values Young Adult || We sought to characterize cognition in individuals with germline PTEN mutations (n = 23) as well as in PTEN mutation-negative individuals with classic Cowden syndrome or Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (n = 2). Twenty-five individuals completed a comprehensive neuropsychological evaluation. One sample t-tests and effect sizes were used to examine differences in participant test scores compared with normal controls. Composite scores were created for each patient within each of the cognitive domains assessed and classified as above average, average, or below average according to normative standards. χ(2) analyses compared these classifications to expected proportions in normal control samples. The mean intelligence quotient was in the average range, and the range of intellectual functioning was very wide (from extremely low to very superior). However, in a large subset of patients, scores were lower than expected on measures of motor functioning, executive functioning, and memory recall, suggesting disruption of frontal circuits in these participants. This is the first study to characterize cognition in individuals with PTEN mutations and associated syndromes using a comprehensive neuropsychological battery. Contrary to previous reports suggesting an association with intellectual disability, the mean intelligence quotient was average, and there was a broad range of intellectual abilities. Specific evidence of disruption of frontal circuits may have implications for treatment compliance and cancer surveillance, and further investigation is warranted.",3 4
"Long-term outcome of 4 Korean families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by 4 different mutations. ||  || We sought to describe the long-term outcome of individuals in 4 Korean families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) with known mutations. Long-term clinical features of familial HCM might be characterized according to the mutation causing HCM. We performed long-term (mean, 13.1 y) clinical evaluations on 46 subjects from 4 Korean families with different mutations. Myosin light chain 3 gene (MYL3) mutation was associated with late-onset HCM with relatively poor prognosis; 1 sudden cardiac death and 2 cases of heart failure with atrial fibrillation occurred among 12 subjects with this mutation. Myosin binding protein C gene (MYBPC3) mutation was associated with 2 cases of sudden cardiac death and 3 cases of heart failure among 7 affected members. Cardiac troponin I type 3 gene (TNNI3) mutation was associated with 5 deaths related to atrial fibrillation and stroke among 12 mutation-positive members. Myosin heavy chain 7 gene (MYH7) mutation was associated with 11 deaths in 15 affected members. The clinical course was quite different for different HCM mutations. Even within the same family, individuals carrying the same mutation differed in disease expression and prognosis.",2 4
"Mutations in ATP-sensitive K+ channel genes cause transient neonatal diabetes and permanent diabetes in childhood or adulthood. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Adenosine Triphosphate Child, Preschool Diabetes Mellitus Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Mutation Pedigree Potassium Channels Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Receptors, Drug Sulfonylurea Receptors || Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus (TNDM) is diagnosed in the first 6 months of life, with remission in infancy or early childhood. For approximately 50% of patients, their diabetes will relapse in later life. The majority of cases result from anomalies of the imprinted region on chromosome 6q24, and 14 patients with ATP-sensitive K+ channel (K(ATP) channel) gene mutations have been reported. We determined the 6q24 status in 97 patients with TNDM. In patients in whom no abnormality was identified, the KCNJ11 gene and/or ABCC8 gene, which encode the Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits of the pancreatic beta-cell K(ATP) channel, were sequenced. K(ATP) channel mutations were found in 25 of 97 (26%) TNDM probands (12 KCNJ11 and 13 ABCC8), while 69 of 97 (71%) had chromosome 6q24 abnormalities. The phenotype associated with KCNJ11 and ABCC8 mutations was similar but markedly different from 6q24 patients who had a lower birth weight and who were diagnosed and remitted earlier (all P < 0.001). K(ATP) channel mutations were identified in 26 additional family members, 17 of whom had diabetes. Of 42 diabetic patients, 91% diagnosed before 6 months remitted, but those diagnosed after 6 months had permanent diabetes (P < 0.0001). K(ATP) channel mutations account for 89% of patients with non-6q24 TNDM and result in a discrete clinical subtype that includes biphasic diabetes that can be treated with sulfonylureas. Remitting neonatal diabetes was observed in two of three mutation carriers, and permanent diabetes occurred after 6 months of age in subjects without an initial diagnosis of neonatal diabetes.",4
"Detection of a large duplication mutation in the myosin-binding protein C3 gene in a case of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adult Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Carrier Proteins DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Duplication Genetic Association Studies Humans INDEL Mutation Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense Point Mutation Ultrasonography || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a cardiovascular disease with autosomal dominant inheritance caused by mutations in genes coding for sarcomeric and/or regulatory proteins expressed in cardiomyocytes. In a small cohort of HCM patients (n=8), we searched for mutations in the two most common genes responsible for HCM and found four missense mutations in the MYH7 gene encoding cardiac β-myosin heavy chain (R204H, M493V, R719W, and R870H) and three mutations in the myosin-binding protein C3 gene (MYBPC3) including one missense (A848V) and two frameshift mutations (c.3713delTG and c.702ins26bp). The c.702ins26bp insertion resulted from the duplication of a 26-bp fragment in a 54-year-old female HCM patient presenting with clinical signs of heart failure due to diastolic dysfunction. Although such large duplications (>10 bp) in the MYBPC3 gene are very rare and have been identified only in 4 families reported so far, the identical duplication mutation was found earlier in a Dutch patient, demonstrating that it may constitute a hitherto unknown founder mutation in central European populations. This observation underscores the significance of insertions into the coding sequence of the MYBPC3 gene for the development and pathogenesis of HCM.",4
"Enlarged vestibular aqueduct: a radiological marker of pendred syndrome, and mutation of the PDS gene. || Adolescent Adult Biomarkers Carrier Proteins Child Child, Preschool Deafness Goiter Humans Infant Membrane Transport Proteins Middle Aged Mutation Sulfate Transporters Syndrome Tomography, X-Ray Computed Vestibular Aqueduct || Although the textbook view of Pendred syndrome is that of an autosomal recessive condition characterized by deafness and goitre, it is increasingly clear that not all such patients present this classical clinical picture. Malformations of the inner ear, specifically enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct, are common in Pendred syndrome and mutations in the PDS (Pendred Syndrome) gene have been recorded in patients presenting with deafness and vestibular aqueduct dilatation only, without other features of Pendred syndrome. Since this is the most common radiological malformation of the cochlea in deaf patients, we investigated what proportion of such cases were due to mutation of the PDS gene. We assessed 57 patients referred with radiological evidence of vestibular aqueduct enlargement, by history, clinical examination, perchlorate discharge test and molecular analysis of the PDS locus. Forty-one patients (72%) had unequivocal evidence of Pendred syndrome. The finding of a single heterozygous mutation at the PDS gene in a further eight was strongly suggestive of a critical role for pendrin, the protein product of the PDS gene, in the generation of enlarged vestibular aqueducts in at least 86% (49/57 cases) of patients with this radiological malformation. Securing the diagnosis of Pendred syndrome may be difficult, especially in the single case. Goitre is an inconstant finding, and the perchlorate discharge test, although helpful, is of diagnostic value only if abnormal. Enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct should be considered as the most likely presentation of Pendred syndrome and should prompt specific investigation of that diagnostic possibility. Pendred syndrome might henceforth be recharacterized as deafness with enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct, which is sometimes associated with goitre.",3 1 4
"The importance of an integrated analysis of clinical, molecular, and functional data for the genetic diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia. || Adult Cardiovascular Diseases Cholesterol, LDL Female Genotype Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Portugal Risk Factors || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is one of the most common monogenic disorders, and the high concentrations of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol presented since birth confers on these patients an increased cardiovascular risk. More than 1,600 alterations have been described in the LDL receptor gene (LDLR), but a large number need to be validated as mutations causing disease to establish a diagnosis of FH. This study aims to characterize, both at the phenotypic and genotypic levels, families with a clinical diagnosis of FH and present evidence for the importance of the integration of clinical, molecular, and functional data for the correct diagnosis of patients with FH. A detailed analysis of the phenotype and genotype presented by 55 families with 13 different alterations in the LDLR was conducted. For eight of these, an extensive functional characterization was performed by flow cytometry, confocal microscopy, and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Carriers of neutral alterations presented a significantly lower incidence of premature cardiovascular disease, lower levels of atherogenic lipoproteins and a large number of these individuals had LDL-cholesterol values below the 75(th) percentile. presented a significantly lower incidence of premature cardiovascular disease, lower levels of atherogenic lipoproteins and a large number of these individuals had LDL-cholesterol values below the 75th percentile However, the functional study was essential to determine the pathogenicity of variants. The data collected illustrate the importance of this integrated analysis for the correct assessment of patients with FH who can otherwise be misdiagnosed.",2 4 0
"The cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene is not the predominant gene for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in the Finnish population. || Amino Acid Substitution Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Female Finland Genetic Linkage Genetic Variation Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Myocardium Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Tropomyosin || The aim of the study was to screen 36 unrelated patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM; 16 familial and 20 sporadic cases) from a genetically homogeneous area in eastern Finland for variants in the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain (beta-MHC) and alpha-tropomyosin (alpha-TM) genes. Mutations in the beta-MHC and alpha-TM genes have been reported to be responsible for 30% to 40% and less than 5% of familial HCM cases, respectively. However, most genetic studies have included patients from tertiary care centers and are subject to referral bias. Exons 3-26 and 40 of the beta-MHC gene and the nine exons of the alpha-TM gene were screened with the PCR-SSCP (polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism) method. Linkage analyses between familial HCM locus and two intragenic polymorphic markers (MYO I and MYO II) of the beta-MHC gene were performed in 16 familial HCM kindreds. A previously reported Arg719Trp (arginine converted to tryptophan in codon 719) mutation of the beta-MHC gene was found in one proband and two relatives. In addition, a novel Asn696Ser (asparagine converted to serine in codon 696) substitution was found in one HCM patient. No linkage between familial HCM and the beta-MHC gene was observed in 16 familial kindreds. A previously reported Aspl75Asn (aspartic acid converted to asparagine in codon 175) mutation of the alpha-TM gene was found in four probands and 16 relatives. Mutations in the beta-MHC and alpha-TM genes accounted for 6% and 25% familial HCM cases and 3% and 11% of all cases, respectively. Our results indicate that the beta-MHC gene is not the predominant gene for HCM in the Finnish population, whereas HCM caused by the Aspl75Asn mutation of the a-TM gene is more common than previously reported.",2 4
"Biochemical and imaging surveillance in germline TP53 mutation carriers with Li-Fraumeni syndrome: 11 year follow-up of a prospective observational study. || Adolescent Adult Aged Biomarkers, Tumor Child Child, Preschool Female Follow-Up Studies Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Heterozygote Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Middle Aged Multimodal Imaging Neoplasm Staging Neoplasms Population Surveillance Prognosis Prospective Studies Survival Rate Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Young Adult || Carriers of a germline TP53 pathogenic variant have a substantial lifetime risk of developing cancer. In 2011, we did a prospective observational study of members of families who chose to either undergo a comprehensive surveillance protocol for individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome or not. We sought to update our assessment of and modify the surveillance protocol, so in this study we report both longer follow-up of these patients and additional patients who underwent surveillance, as well as update the originally presented surveillance protocol. A clinical surveillance protocol using physical examination and frequent biochemical and imaging studies (consisting of whole-body MRI, brain MRI, breast MRI, mammography, abdominal and pelvic ultrasound, and colonoscopy) was introduced at three tertiary care centres in Canada and the USA on Jan 1, 2004, for carriers of TP53 pathogenic variants. After confirmation of TP53 mutation, participants either chose to undergo surveillance or chose not to undergo surveillance. Patients could cross over between groups at any time. The primary outcome measure was detection of asymptomatic tumours by surveillance investigations. The secondary outcome measure was 5 year overall survival established from a tumour diagnosed symptomatically (in the non-surveillance group) versus one diagnosed by surveillance. We completed survival analyses using an as-treated approach. Between Jan 1, 2004, and July 1, 2015, we identified 89 carriers of TP53 pathogenic variants in 39 unrelated families, of whom 40 (45%) agreed to surveillance and 49 (55%) declined surveillance. 19 (21%) patients crossed over from the non-surveillance to the surveillance group, giving a total of 59 (66%) individuals undergoing surveillance for a median of 32 months (IQR 12-87). 40 asymptomatic tumours have been detected in 19 (32%) of 59 patients who underwent surveillance. Two additional cancers were diagnosed between surveillance assessments (false negatives) and two biopsied lesions were non-neoplastic entities on pathological review (false positives). Among the 49 individuals who initially declined surveillance, 61 symptomatic tumours were diagnosed in 43 (88%) patients. 21 (49%) of the 43 individuals not on surveillance who developed cancer were alive compared with 16 (84%) of the 19 individuals undergoing surveillance who developed cancer (p=0·012) after a median follow-up of 46 months (IQR 22-72) for those not on surveillance and 38 months (12-86) for those on surveillance. 5 year overall survival was 88·8% (95% CI 78·7-100) in the surveillance group and 59·6% (47·2-75·2) in the non-surveillance group (p=0·0132). Our findings show that long-term compliance with a comprehensive surveillance protocol for early tumour detection in individuals with pathogenic TP53 variants is feasible and that early tumour detection through surveillance is associated with improved long-term survival. Incorporation of this approach into clinical management of these patients should be considered. Canadian Institutes for Heath Research, Canadian Cancer Society, Terry Fox Research Institute, SickKids Foundation, and Soccer for Hope Foundation.",3 4
"Twenty novel mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A gene causing Fabry disease. || Alternative Splicing Chromosome Mapping Exons Fabry Disease Female Genetic Carrier Screening Genetic Markers Humans Introns Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Male Mutation Mutation, Missense X Chromosome alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease, an X-linked inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism, results from the deficient activity of the lysosomal exoglycohydrolase alpha-galactosidase A (EC 3.2.1.22; alpha-Gal A). The nature of the molecular lesions in the alpha-Gal A gene in 30 unrelated families was determined to provide precise heterozygote detection, prenatal diagnosis, and define genotype-phenotype correlations. Genomic DNA was isolated from affected males and/or carrier females from 30 unrelated families with Fabry disease. The entire alpha-Gal A coding region and flanking intronic sequences were analyzed by PCR amplification and automated sequencing. Twenty new mutations were identified, each in a single family: C142R, G183D, S235C, W236L, D244H, P259L, M267I, I289F, Q321E, C378Y, C52X, W277X, IVS4(+4), IVS6(+2), IVS6(-1), 35del13, 256del1, 892ins1, 1176del4, and 1188del1. In the remaining 10 unrelated Fabry families, 9 previously reported mutations were detected: M42V, R112C, S148R, D165V, N215S (in 2 families), Q99X, C142X, R227X, and 1072del3. Haplotype analysis using markers closely flanking the alpha-Gal A gene indicated that the two patients with the N215S lesion were unrelated. The IVS4(+4) mutation was a rare intronic splice site mutation that causes Fabry disease. These studies further define the heterogeneity of mutations in the alpha-Gal A gene causing Fabry disease, permit precise heterozygote detection and prenatal diagnosis, and help delineate phenotype-genotype correlations in this disease. </AB",3 4
"NMR-based functional profiling of RASopathies and oncogenic RAS mutations. || Amino Acid Substitution Cell Line, Tumor Enzyme Activation HEK293 Cells Humans Mutation, Missense Neoplasms Neurofibromatosis 1 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, Biomolecular Oncogene Protein p21(ras) Signal Transduction || Defects in the RAS small G protein or its associated network of regulatory proteins that disrupt GTPase cycling are a major cause of cancer and developmental RASopathy disorders. Lack of robust functional assays has been a major hurdle in RAS pathway-targeted drug development. We used NMR to obtain detailed mechanistic data on RAS cycling defects conferred by oncogenic mutations, or full-length RASopathy-derived regulatory proteins. By monitoring the conformation of wild-type and oncogenic RAS in real-time, we show that opposing properties integrate with regulators to hyperactivate oncogenic RAS mutants. Q61L and G13D exhibited rapid nucleotide exchange and an unexpected susceptibility to GAP-mediated hydrolysis, in direct contrast with G12V, indicating different approaches must be taken to inhibit these oncoproteins. An NMR methodology was established to directly monitor RAS cycling by intact, multidomain proteins encoded by RASopathy genes in mammalian cell extracts. By measuring GAP activity from tumor cells, we demonstrate how loss of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) increases RAS-GTP levels in NF1-derived cells. We further applied this methodology to profile Noonan Syndrome (NS)-derived SOS1 mutants. Combining NMR with cell-based assays allowed us to differentiate defects in catalysis, allosteric regulation, and membrane targeting of individual mutants, while revealing a membrane-dependent compensatory effect that attenuates dramatic increases in RAS activation shown by Y337C, L550P, and I252T. Our NMR method presents a precise and robust measure of RAS activity, providing mechanistic insights that facilitate discovery of therapeutics targeted against the RAS signaling network.",4 0
"Prevalence and Spectrum of Germline Cancer Susceptibility Gene Mutations Among Patients With Early-Onset Colorectal Cancer. || Adult Age of Onset Colorectal Neoplasms Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Middle Aged Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Prevalence || Hereditary cancer syndromes infer high cancer risks and require intensive cancer surveillance, yet the prevalence and spectrum of these conditions among unselected patients with early-onset colorectal cancer (CRC) is largely undetermined. To determine the frequency and spectrum of cancer susceptibility gene mutations among patients with early-onset CRC. Overall, 450 patients diagnosed with colorectal cancer younger than 50 years were prospectively accrued from 51 hospitals into the Ohio Colorectal Cancer Prevention Initiative from January 1, 2013, to June 20, 2016. Mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency was determined by microsatellite instability and/or immunohistochemistry. Germline DNA was tested for mutations in 25 cancer susceptibility genes using next-generation sequencing. Mutation prevalence and spectrum in patients with early-onset CRC was determined. Clinical characteristics were assessed by mutation status. In total 450 patients younger than 50 years were included in the study, and 75 gene mutations were found in 72 patients (16%). Forty-eight patients (10.7%) had MMR-deficient tumors, and 40 patients (83.3%) had at least 1 gene mutation: 37 had Lynch syndrome (13, MLH1 [including one with constitutional MLH1 methylation]; 16, MSH2; 1, MSH2/monoallelic MUTYH; 2, MSH6; 5, PMS2); 1 patient had the APC c.3920T>A, p.I1307K mutation and a PMS2 variant; 9 patients (18.8%) had double somatic MMR mutations (including 2 with germline biallelic MUTYH mutations); and 1 patient had somatic MLH1 methylation. Four hundred two patients (89.3%) had MMR-proficient tumors, and 32 patients (8%) had at least 1 gene mutation: 9 had mutations in high-penetrance CRC genes (5, APC; 1, APC/PMS2; 2, biallelic MUTYH; 1, SMAD4); 13 patients had mutations in high- or moderate-penetrance genes not traditionally associated with CRC (3, ATM; 1, ATM/CHEK2; 2, BRCA1; 4, BRCA2; 1, CDKN2A; 2, PALB2); 10 patients had mutations in low-penetrance CRC genes (3, APC c.3920T>A, p.I1307K; 7, monoallelic MUTYH). Importantly, 24 of 72 patients (33.3%) who were mutation positive did not meet established genetic testing criteria for the gene(s) in which they had a mutation. Of 450 patients with early-onset CRC, 72 (16%) had gene mutations. Given the high frequency and wide spectrum of mutations, genetic counseling and testing with a multigene panel could be considered for all patients with early-onset CRC.",3 4
"Moyamoya syndrome in a patient with Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair. || Child Female Humans Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Loose Anagen Hair Syndrome Moyamoya Disease Mutation Noonan Syndrome || Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair is one of the RASopathies characterized by Noonan syndrome-like features with unique ectodermal abnormalities. This syndrome is caused by mutations in the SHOC2 gene. We encountered a patient with moyamoya syndrome associated with Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair presenting with transient ischemic attacks. A 6-year-old girl was diagnosed with Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair because of profound short stature and ectodermal anomalies such as sparse and easily pluckable hair. A heterozygous mutation of c.4A>G (p.S2G) in the SHOC2 gene was identified, and recombinant human growth hormone therapy was initiated at 8 years of age. At age 10, she manifested recurrent left hemiplegia. Moreover, cerebrovascular imaging revealed occlusion or narrowing of both internal carotid arteries and both middle cerebral arteries with distal moyamoya-like vessels. She is treated with aspirin and calcium channel blocker. We describe the first case of Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair associated with moyamoya syndrome, although it has been reported to be associated with a few cases of other RASopathies, including Noonan, cardiofaciocutaneous, and Costello syndromes. This report emphasizes the associations between cerebrovascular anomalies and Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair.",4
"A case of Fabry nephropathy with histological features of oligonephropathy. || Adolescent Diagnosis, Differential Fabry Disease Glycolipids Humans Kidney Diseases Kidney Glomerulus Male Mutation, Missense Sphingolipids Trihexosylceramides alpha-Galactosidase || Newborn screening studies indicate the expected high incidence of later-onset Fabry disease with silent Fabry nephropathy while, with recent improved clinical care of premature infants, children with congenital oligonephropathy caused by premature embryonal development of the kidney are thought to be increasing. However, the coexistence of Fabry nephropathy and oligonephropathy has not been reported previously. We present the case of a 13-year-old boy who was diagnosed with Fabry nephropathy accompanied with histological features of oligonephropathy. He was born as a preterm baby, and a renal biopsy was performed because of mild renal dysfunction and mild proteinuria. He had neither characteristic early symptoms nor a family history of Fabry disease. Histologic findings demonstrated diffuse global enlargement and foamy change of podocytes with markedly decreased number and enlargement of the glomeruli. Both his plasma and leukocyte α-galactosidase A (GLA) activities were markedly decreased, and the plasma globotriaosylsphingosine and urine globotriaosylceramide levels were increased. Gene analysis revealed a missense mutation, R112H, in the GLA gene, which had been reported in the later-onset phenotype of Fabry patients. He is now under treatment with enzyme replacement therapy and an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor. This case indicated the possible co-occurrence of Fabry nephropathy and oligonephropathy. For early diagnosis and timely management, careful examinations for proteinuria and renal function, in addition to establishing an effective screening system for Fabry disease, will be necessary.",4
"Twenty-two novel mutations in the lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) underscore the genotype-phenotype correlation in glycogen storage disease type II. ||  || Patients with glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII, Pompe disease) suffer from progressive muscle weakness due to acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency. The disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait with a spectrum of clinical phenotypes. We have investigated 29 cases of GSDII and thereby identified 55 pathogenic mutations of the acid alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) encoding acid maltase. There were 34 different mutations identified, 22 of which were novel. All of the missense mutations and two other mutations with an unpredictable effect on acid alpha-glucosidase synthesis and function were transiently expressed in COS cells. The effect of a novel splice-site mutation was investigated by real-time PCR analysis. The outcome of our analysis underscores the notion that the clinical phenotype of GSDII is largely dictated by the nature of the mutations in the GAA alleles. This genotype-phenotype correlation makes DNA analysis a valuable tool to help predict the clinical course of the disease.",2 1 4 0 3
"Compound heterozygous mutations in the SUR1 (ABCC 8) subunit of pancreatic K(ATP) channels cause neonatal diabetes by perturbing the coupling between Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Adenosine Triphosphate Animals COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops Diabetic Ketoacidosis Heterozygote Humans Infant KATP Channels Male Mutation Patch-Clamp Techniques Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Protein Multimerization Receptors, Drug Sulfonylurea Compounds Sulfonylurea Receptors || KATP channels regulate insulin secretion by coupling β-cell metabolism to membrane excitability. These channels are comprised of a pore-forming Kir6.2 tetramer which is enveloped by four regulatory SUR1 subunits. ATP acts on Kir6.2 to stabilize the channel closed state while ADP (coordinated with Mg(2+)) activates channels via the SUR1 domains. Aberrations in nucleotide-binding or in coupling binding to gating can lead to hyperinsulinism or diabetes. Here, we report a case of diabetes in a 7-mo old child with compound heterozygous mutations in ABCC8 (SUR1[A30V] and SUR1[G296R]). In unison, these mutations lead to a gain of KATP channel function, which will attenuate the β-cell response to increased metabolism and will thereby decrease insulin secretion. (86)Rb(+) flux assays on COSm6 cells coexpressing the mutant subunits (to recapitulate the compound heterozygous state) show a 2-fold increase in basal rate of (86)Rb(+) efflux relative to WT channels. Experiments on excised inside-out patches also reveal a slight increase in activity, manifested as an enhancement in stimulation by MgADP in channels expressing the compound heterozygous mutations or homozygous G296R mutation. In addition, the IC 50 for ATP inhibition of homomeric A30V channels was increased ~6-fold, and was increased ~3-fold for both heteromeric A30V+WT channels or compound heterozygous (A30V +G296R) channels. Thus, each mutation makes a mechanistically distinct contribution to the channel gain-of-function that results in neonatal diabetes, and which we predict may contribute to diabetes in related carrier individuals.",4 0
"The relationship of molecular genetic to clinical diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia in a Danish population. || Adult Apolipoproteins B Denmark Female Genetic Testing Genotype Heterozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Phenotype Predictive Value of Tests Receptors, LDL Sensitivity and Specificity || The genes encoding the LDL receptor and apoB were screened for mutations associated with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) in 408 patients referred to the Lipid Clinic in 1995-2003. The study aimed at testing the ability of three different sets of clinical criteria to predict the results of molecular genetic analysis, and secondly test whether population-based age- and sex-specific percentiles of LDL-cholesterol offer useful supplemental information in the selection of patients for molecular genetic analysis. The patients were retrospectively categorised according to Simon Broome Register Group criteria, Make Early Diagnosis to Prevent Early Death criteria (MEDPED) and the Dutch Lipid Clinic Network criteria, and the distribution of patients was compared to the results of the molecular genetic analysis. The study illustrates a classical dilemma. Mutation detection rates (and specificities) are high only if sensitivity is very low and vice versa: to find most mutation carriers, even patients with only possible FH must be examined by molecular genetic testing leading to mutation detection rates as low as 30-40%.",4
"Multiplex targeted sequencing identifies recurrently mutated genes in autism spectrum disorders. || Cephalometry Child Child Development Disorders, Pervasive Child, Preschool Chromatin Assembly and Disassembly Cohort Studies DNA Probes DNA-Binding Proteins Exome Female Genetic Association Studies Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Megalencephaly Microcephaly Mutation Nuclear Proteins PTEN Phosphohydrolase Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Protein-Tyrosine Kinases Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Repressor Proteins Sequence Analysis, DNA T-Box Domain Proteins Transcription Factors beta Catenin || Exome sequencing studies of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) have identified many de novo mutations but few recurrently disrupted genes. We therefore developed a modified molecular inversion probe method enabling ultra-low-cost candidate gene resequencing in very large cohorts. To demonstrate the power of this approach, we captured and sequenced 44 candidate genes in 2446 ASD probands. We discovered 27 de novo events in 16 genes, 59% of which are predicted to truncate proteins or disrupt splicing. We estimate that recurrent disruptive mutations in six genes-CHD8, DYRK1A, GRIN2B, TBR1, PTEN, and TBL1XR1-may contribute to 1% of sporadic ASDs. Our data support associations between specific genes and reciprocal subphenotypes (CHD8-macrocephaly and DYRK1A-microcephaly) and replicate the importance of a β-catenin-chromatin-remodeling network to ASD etiology.",4
"Mutation and phenotypic spectrum in patients with cardio-facio-cutaneous and Costello syndrome. || Abnormalities, Multiple Adult Child DNA Mutational Analysis Developmental Disabilities Facies Heart Defects, Congenital Humans Intellectual Disability MAP Kinase Kinase 1 MAP Kinase Kinase 2 Mutation Phenotype Proto-Oncogene Proteins Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras) Skin Abnormalities Syndrome ras Proteins || Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) and Costello syndrome (CS) are congenital disorders with a significant clinical overlap. The recent discovery of heterozygous mutations in genes encoding components of the RAS-RAF-MAPK pathway in both CFC and CS suggested a similar underlying pathogenesis of these two disorders. While CFC is heterogeneous with mutations in BRAF, MAP2K1, MAP2K2 and KRAS, HRAS alterations are almost exclusively associated with CS. We carried out a comprehensive mutation analysis in 51 CFC-affected patients and 31 individuals with CS. Twelve different BRAF alterations were found in twenty-four patients with CFC (47.0%), two MAP2K1 mutations in five (9.8%) and two MAP2K2 sequence variations in three CFC-affected individuals (5.9%), whereas three patients had a KRAS alteration (5.9%). We identified four different missense mutations of HRAS in twenty-eight cases with CS (90.3%), while KRAS mutations were detected in two infants with a phenotype meeting criteria for CS (6.5%). In 14 informative families, we traced the parental origin of HRAS alterations and demonstrated inheritance of the mutated allele exclusively from the father, further confirming a paternal bias in the parental origin of HRAS mutations in CS. Careful clinical evaluation of patients with BRAF and MAP2K1/2 alterations revealed the presence of slight phenotypic differences regarding craniofacial features in MAP2K1- and MAP2K2-mutation positive individuals, suggesting possible genotype-phenotype correlations.",4
"Subtle abnormalities in contractile function are an early manifestation of sarcomere mutations in dilated cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Cardiomyopathy, Dilated Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Echocardiography Female Genotype Heart Rate Humans Male Middle Aged Myocardial Contraction Phenotype Sarcomeres Ventricular Function, Left Young Adult || Sarcomere mutations cause both dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM); however, the steps leading from mutation to disease are not well described. By studying mutation carriers before a clinical diagnosis develops, we characterize the early manifestations of sarcomere mutations in DCM and investigate how these manifestations differ from sarcomere mutations associated with HCM. Sixty-two genotyped individuals in families with sarcomeric DCM underwent clinical evaluation including strain echocardiography. The group included 12 subclinical DCM mutation carriers with normal cardiac dimensions and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF ≥55%), 21 overt DCM subjects, and 29 related mutation (-) normal controls. Results were compared with a previously characterized cohort of 60 subclinical HCM subjects (sarcomere mutation carriers without left ventricular hypertrophy). Systolic myocardial tissue velocity, longitudinal, circumferential, and radial strain, and longitudinal and radial strain rate were reduced by 10%-23% in subclinical DCM mutation carriers compared with controls (P<0.001 for all comparisons), after adjusting for age and family relations. No significant differences in diastolic parameters were identified comparing the subclinical and control cohorts. The opposite pattern of contractile abnormalities with reduced diastolic but preserved systolic function was seen in subclinical HCM. Subtle abnormalities in systolic function are present in subclinical DCM mutation carriers, despite normal left ventricular size and ejection fraction. In contrast, impaired relaxation and preserved systolic function appear to be the predominant early manifestations of sarcomere mutations that lead to HCM. These findings support the theory that the mutation's intrinsic impact on sarcomere function influences whether a dilated or hypertrophic phenotype develops.",2 4
"Detection of mutations and large rearrangements of the low-density lipoprotein receptor gene in Taiwanese patients with familial hypercholesterolemia. || Adult Apolipoproteins B DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Incidence Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Prevalence Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Receptors, LDL Serine Endopeptidases Taiwan || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is commonly caused by mutations in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), apolipoprotein B, and proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 genes. The study aim was to investigate patients with FH in Taiwan, using molecular diagnostic methods, and compare the abnormalities in the small mutation and large DNA rearrangement subgroups. In total, 102 unrelated probands with FH were tested for mutations by exon-by-exon sequence analysis (EBESA) and multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). EBESA identified gene apolipoprotein B R3500W in 8 probands and 25 mis-sense, 5 nonsense, and 6 frameshift LDLR mutations in 52 probands; 11 were novel mutations. Of the 42 probands with mutations undetected by EBESA, 8 had abnormal MLPA patterns, including 2 with exon 6 to 18 deletions, 2 with exon 9 deletion, 1 with exon 6 to 8 deletions, 1 with exon 11 deletion, 1 with exon 3 to 5 duplications, and 1 with exon 7 to 12 duplications. Pedigree analysis showed mutation cosegregation with hypercholesterolemia in affected family members. Mean lipid profiles and rate of failure to lower LDL cholesterol <100 mg/dl in response to rosuvastatin/ezetimibe treatment were similar in groups with abnormal MLPA patterns and groups carrying nonsense or frameshift mutations. In conclusion, frequency of large LDLR rearrangement was approximately 8% in Taiwanese patients with FH. The response to statin drugs differed between probands with abnormal MLPA patterns and probands carrying mis-sense or undetected mutations.",4
"Predicting PTEN mutations: an evaluation of Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome clinical features. || Adult Cohort Studies Exons Genotype Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Logistic Models Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phenotype || Cowden syndrome (CS) is associated with benign hamartomatous lesions and risks for thyroid, breast and endometrial cancers. Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome is an allelic disorder characterised by macrocephaly, intestinal polyps, lipomas, and pigmented penile macules. Diagnostic criteria for CS are based on the presence of a range of clinical features. However, prior data on the component clinical features have been based primarily on compilations of cases reported before development of consensus diagnostic criteria. This study sought to determine the clinical features most predictive of a mutation in the largest single cohort of patients with clinical testing for PTEN mutations reported to date. Molecular and clinical data were reviewed on 802 patients referred for PTEN analysis by a single laboratory. Deleterious mutations were found in 172 (21.4%) subjects. Among mutation carriers significant differences from previous reports were found for the frequencies of several clinical features, including macrocephaly, uterine fibroids, benign breast disease, and endometrial cancer. Logistic regression analyses indicated that female mutation carriers were best identified by the presence of macrocephaly, endometrial cancer, trichilemmomas, papillomatous papules, breast cancer, benign thyroid disease, and benign gastrointestinal (GI) lesions. For males, the most discriminating features were macrocephaly, lipomas, papillomatous papules, penile freckling, benign GI lesions, and benign thyroid disease. Age related differences were also identified. The mutation frequency in patients meeting CS diagnostic criteria (34%) was significantly lower than previously reported, suggesting a need for reevaluation of these criteria. A mutation prediction model has been developed which can help identify patients appropriate for PTEN testing in clinical practice.",3 4
"Tumor genome analysis includes germline genome: are we ready for surprises? || Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Chromosome Aberrations Early Detection of Cancer Family Female Genetic Counseling Genetic Testing Genomics Germ Cells Germ-Line Mutation High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Middle Aged Neoplasms Retrospective Studies || We sought to describe the spectrum of potential and confirmed germline genomic events incidentally identified during routine medium-throughput somatic tumor DNA sequencing, and to provide a framework for pre- and post-test consent and counseling for patients and families. Targeted tumor-only next-generation sequencing (NGS) had been used to evaluate for possible druggable genomic events obtained from consecutive new patients with metastatic gastroesophageal, hepatobiliary or colorectal cancer seen at the University of Chicago. A panel of medical oncologists, cancer geneticists and genetic counselors retrospectively grouped these patients (N = 111) based on probability of possessing a potentially inherited mutation in a cancer susceptibility gene, both prior to and after incorporating tumor-only NGS results. High-risk patients (determined from NGS results) were contacted and counseled in person by a genetic counselor (N = 21). When possible and indicated, germline genetic testing was offered. Of 8 evaluable high-risk patients, 7 underwent germline testing. Three (37.5%) had confirmed actionable germline mutations (all in the BRCA2 gene). NGS offers promise, but poses significant challenges for oncologists who are ill prepared to handle incidental findings that have clinical implications for at risk family members. In this relatively small cohort of patients undergoing tumor genomic testing for gastrointestinal malignancies, we incidentally identified 3 BRCA2 mutations carriers. This report underscores the need for oncologists to develop a framework for pre- and post-test communication of risks to patients undergoing routine tumor-only sequencing.",4
"Germline TP53 Mutations in Patients With Early-Onset   Colorectal Cancer in the Colon Cancer Family Registry. || Adenocarcinoma Adult Age of Onset Australia Biomarkers, Tumor Canada Colorectal Neoplasms Computer Simulation Cross-Sectional Studies DNA Glycosylases DNA Mismatch Repair DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Heredity Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Models, Genetic New Zealand Pedigree Phenotype Predictive Value of Tests Registries Risk Assessment Risk Factors Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 United States Young Adult || Li-Fraumeni syndrome, usually characterized by germline TP53 mutations, is associated with markedly elevated lifetime risks of multiple cancers, and has been linked to an increased risk of early-onset colorectal cancer. To examine the frequency of germline TP53 alterations in patients with early-onset colorectal cancer. This was a multicenter cross-sectional cohort study of individuals recruited to the Colon Cancer Family Registry (CCFR) from 1998 through 2007 (genetic testing data updated as of January 2015). Both population-based and clinic-based patients in the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand were recruited to the CCFR. Demographic information, clinical history, and family history data were obtained at enrollment. Biospecimens were collected from consenting probands and families, including microsatellite instability and DNA mismatch repair immunohistochemistry results. A total of a 510 individuals diagnosed as having colorectal cancer at age 40 years or younger and lacking a known hereditary cancer syndrome were identified from the CCFR as being potentially eligible. Fifty-three participants were excluded owing to subsequent identification of germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes (n = 47) or biallelic MUTYH mutations (n = 6). Germline sequencing of the TP53 gene was performed. Identified TP53 alterations were assessed for pathogenicity using literature and international mutation database searches and in silico prediction models. Frequency of nonsynonymous germline TP53 alterations. Among 457 eligible participants (314, population-based; 143, clinic-based; median age at diagnosis, 36 years [range, 15-40 years]), 6 (1.3%; 95% CI, 0.5%-2.8%) carried germline missense TP53 alterations, none of whom met clinical criteria for Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Four of the identified TP53 alterations have been previously described in the literature in probands with clinical features of Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and 2 were novel alterations. In a large cohort of patients with early-onset colorectal cancer, germline TP53 mutations were detected at a frequency comparable with the published prevalence of germline APC mutations in colorectal cancer. With the increasing use of multigene next-generation sequencing panels in hereditary cancer risk assessment, clinicians will be faced with the challenge of interpreting the biologic and clinical significance of germline TP53 mutations in families whose phenotypes are atypical for Li-Fraumeni syndrome.",4
"Genetic screening for hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. || Gastrectomy Genetic Counseling Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Humans Pedigree Penetrance Polymorphism, Genetic Stomach Neoplasms || Knowledge regarding the genetic basis of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer has greatly increased in the past 4 years, namely due to the discovery of segregating germline mutations in the gene coding for E-cadherin, within families with this cancer predisposing syndrome. Members of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer families have predominantly high predisposition to develop diffuse carcinomas of the stomach but can also be associated with an elevate risk for other types of cancer, namely lobular breast carcinoma. In this review, we focus on the epidemiology, pathology and genetics of gastric cancer, describe families, E-cadherin mutations, and suggest alternative candidate genes underlying the hereditary diffuse gastric cancer syndrome. This knowledge is a fundamental step towards accurate genetic counselling, in which a highly specialized presymptomatic therapeutic intervention should be offered.",4
"Genetic heterozygosity and pseudodeficiency in the Pompe disease newborn screening pilot program. || False Positive Reactions Feasibility Studies Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Haplotypes Humans Infant, Newborn Mutation Neonatal Screening Pilot Projects alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) caused by deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) activity. This is the first LSD in which newborn screening has been shown to improve clinical outcomes. Newborn screening also identified multiple rare gene variants in this population. Among 132,538 newborns screened, 107 babies (1 in 1239) who had low dried blood spot GAA activity were genotyped. Sixty-nine (64.5%) babies had a total of 54 mutations and 35 novel predictably pathogenic mutations; 36 babies (33.6%) who had no mutation were homozygous for the c.[1726A; 2065A] pseudodeficiency allele. Because 81% of the chromosomes (14% in the controls) were in haplotype *03, we found a link between the pseudodeficiency allele and other mutated alleles. The newborns with Pompe disease detected by screening had lymphocyte GAA activities 0.45 to 1.65 nmol/mg/h (normal 66.7+/-33.8), while only 2 of the 100 false-positive cases had GAA activity less than 2.00 nmol/mg/h (or 3% of the normal mean). Therefore, newborn screening for Pompe disease could be successfully conducted by including genotyping and lymphocyte GAA assay, even in a population with mutation heterozygosity and pseudodeficiency.",3 1 4
"Mutational analysis of the GLA gene in Mexican families with Fabry disease. || DNA Mutational Analysis Fabry Disease Female Genotype Humans Male Mexico Microsatellite Repeats Mutation Pedigree Phenotype alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is a lysosomal storage disorder, which develops due to a deficiency in the hydrolytic enzyme, α-galactosidase A (α-Gal A). Alpha-Gal A hydrolyzes glycosphingolipid globotriaosylceramide (Gb3), and an α-Gal A deficiency leads to Gb3 accumulation in tissues and cells in the body. This pathology is likely to involve multiple systems, but it is generally considered to affect primarily vascular endothelium. In this study, we investigated mutations in the GLA gene, which encodes α-Gal A, in Mexican families with FD. We included seven probands with FD that carried known mutations. We analysed pedigrees of the probands, and performed molecular screening in 65 relatives with the potential of carrying a GLA mutation. Five mutations (P40S, IVS4+4, G328V, R363H, R404del) were detected in seven unrelated Mexican families with the classic FD phenotype. Of the 65 relatives examined, 42 (64.6%) had a GLA gene mutation. In summary, among seven Mexican probands with FD, 65 relatives were at risk of carrying a known GLA mutation, and molecular screening identified 42 individuals with the mutation. Thus, our findings showed that it is important to perform molecular analysis in families with FD to detect mutations and to provide accurate diagnoses for individuals that could be affected.",3 4
"Molecular and phenotypic effects of heterozygous, homozygous, and compound heterozygote myosin heavy-chain mutations. || Actins Biopsy Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Family Leave Female Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Male Muscle Contraction Muscle, Skeletal Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Penetrance Phenotype || Autosomal dominant familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) has variable penetrance and phenotype. Heterozygous mutations in MYH7 encoding beta-myosin heavy chain are the most common causes of FHC, and we proposed that ""enhanced"" mutant actin-myosin function is the causative molecular abnormality. We have studied individuals from families in which members have two, one, or no mutant MYH7 alleles to examine for dose effects. In one family, a member homozygous for Lys207Gln had cardiomyopathy complicated by left ventricular dilatation, systolic impairment, atrial fibrillation, and defibrillator interventions. Only one of five heterozygous relatives had FHC. Leu908Val and Asp906Gly mutations were detected in a second family in which penetrance for Leu908Val heterozygotes was 46% (21/46) and 25% (3/12) for Asp906Gly. Despite the low penetrance, hypertrophy was severe in several heterozygotes. Two individuals with both mutations developed severe FHC. The velocities of actin translocation (V(actin)) by mutant and wild-type (WT) myosins were compared in the in vitro motility assay. Compared with WT/WT, V(actin) was 34% faster for WT/D906G and 21% for WT/L908V. Surprisingly V(actin) for Leu908Val/Asp906Gly and Lys207Gln/Lys207Gln mutants were similar to WT. The apparent enhancement of mechanical performance with mutant/WT myosin was not observed for mutant/mutant myosin. This suggests that V(actin) may be a poor predictor of disease penetrance or severity and that power production may be more appropriate, or that the limited availability of double mutant patients prohibits any definitive conclusions. Finally, severe FHC in heterozygous individuals can occur despite very low penetrance, suggesting these mutations alone are insufficient to cause FHC and that uncharacterized modifying mechanisms exert powerful influences.",2 4
"Glycogen storage disease type II: identification of four novel missense mutations (D645N, G648S, R672W, R672Q) and two insertions/deletions in the acid alpha-glucosidase locus of patients of differing phenotype. || Adult Child, Preschool Female Fibroblasts Frameshift Mutation Genotype Glucan 1,4-alpha-Glucosidase Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Homozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Muscles Mutagenesis, Site-Directed Mutation Phenotype Sequence Analysis, DNA Sequence Deletion alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII), an autosomal recessive myopathic disorder, results from deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase. We searched for mutations in an evolutionarily conserved region in 54 patients of differing phenotype. Four novel mutations (D645N, G448S, R672W, and R672Q) and a previously described mutation (C647W) were identified in five patients and their deleterious effect on enzyme expression demonstrated in vitro. Two novel frame-shifting insertions/deletions (delta nt766-785/insC and +insG@nt2243) were identified in two patients with exon 14 mutations. The remaining three patients were either homozygous for their mutations (D645N/D645 and C647W/C647W) or carried a previously described leaky splice site mutation (IVS1-13T-->G). For all patients ""in vivo"" enzyme activity was consistent with clinical phenotype. Agreement of genotype with phenotype and in vitro versus in vivo enzyme was seen in three patients (two infantile patients carrying C647W/C647W and D645N/+insG@nt2243 and an adult patient heteroallelic for G648S/IVS1-13T-->G). Relative discordance was found in a juvenile patient homozygous for the non-expressing R672Q and an adult patient heterozygous for the minimally expressing R672W and delta nt766-785/+insC. Possible explanations include differences in in vitro assays vs in vivo enzyme activity, tissue specific expression with diminished enzyme expression/stability in fibroblasts vs muscle, somatic mosaicism, and modifying genes.",3 1 4 0
"Mutations in the COCH gene are a frequent cause of autosomal dominant progressive cochleo-vestibular dysfunction, but not of Meniere's disease. || Adult DNA Mutational Analysis Deafness Exons Extracellular Matrix Proteins Genes, Dominant Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Japan Meniere Disease Middle Aged Models, Molecular Mutation Pedigree Point Mutation Protein Binding Protein Structure, Tertiary Proteins Vertigo Vestibular Diseases || The COCH gene is the only gene identified in man that causes autosomal dominantly inherited hearing loss associated with vestibular dysfunction. The condition is rare and only five mutations have been reported worldwide. All affected families showed a similar progressive hearing loss and vestibular dysfunction. Since Meniere's disease-like symptoms have also been described in some families, it was suggested that COCH mutations might be present in some patients diagnosed with Meniere's disease. In this study, using a Japanese population, we performed a COCH mutation analysis in 23 patients from independent families with autosomal dominant hearing impairment, four of whom reported vestibular symptoms, and also in 20 Meniere's patients. While a new point mutation, A119 T, was found in a patient with autosomal dominant hearing loss and vestibular symptoms, no mutations were found in the Meniere's patients. Like all other previously identified COCH mutations, the mutation identified here is a missense mutation located in the FCH domain of the protein. The current mutation is located in close spatial proximity to W117, in which a mutation (W117R) had previously been associated with autosomal dominant hearing loss. Model building suggests that, like the W117R mutation, the A119 T mutation does not affect the structural integrity of the FCH domain, but may interfere with the interaction with a yet unknown binding partner. We conclude that mutations in the COCH gene are responsible for a significant fraction of patients with autosomal dominantly inherited hearing loss accompanied by vestibular symptoms, but not for dominant hearing loss without vestibular dysfunction, or sporadic Meniere's disease.",4
"Coding sequence mutations identified in MYH7, TNNT2, SCN5A, CSRP3, LBD3, and TCAP from 313 patients with familial or idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. || Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Dilated Connectin DNA Mutational Analysis Ethnic Groups Exons Family Health Humans Introns LIM Domain Proteins Muscle Proteins Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Protein Structure, Tertiary Sodium Channels Troponin T || More than 20 genes have been reported to cause idiopathic and familial dilated cardiomyopathy (IDC/FDC), but the frequency of genetic causation remains poorly understood. Blood samples were collected and DNA prepared from 313 patients, 183 with FDC and 130 with IDC. Genomic DNA underwent bidirectional sequencing of six genes, and mutation carriers were followed up by evaluation of additional family members. We identified in 36 probands, 31 unique protein-altering variants (11.5% overall) that were not identified in 253 control subjects (506 chromosomes). These included 13 probands (4.2%) with 12 beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH7) mutations, nine probands (2.9%) with six different cardiac troponin T (TNNT2) mutations, eight probands (2.6%) carrying seven different cardiac sodium channel (SCN5A) mutations, three probands (1.0%) with three titin-cap or telethonin (TCAP) mutations, three probands (1.0%) with two LIM domain binding 3 (LDB3) mutations, and one proband (0.3%) with a muscle LIM protein (CSRP3) mutation. Four nucleotide changes did not segregate with phentoype and/or did not alter a conserved amino acid and were therefore considered unlikely to be disease-causing. Mutations in 11 probands were assessed as likely disease-causing, and in 21 probands were considered possibly disease-causing. These 32 probands included 14 of the 130 with IDC (10.8%) and 18 of 183 with FDC (9.8%) Mutations of these six genes each account for a small fraction of the genetic cause of FDC/IDC. The frequency of possible or likely disease-causing mutations in these genes is similar for IDC and FDC.",4
"Clinical utility of gene panel-based testing for hereditary myelodysplastic syndrome/acute leukemia predisposition syndromes. || Acute Disease Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Child Child, Preschool Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Humans Infant Leukemia Male Middle Aged Myelodysplastic Syndromes Young Adult || ",4
"Efficacy of alirocumab in 1191 patients with a wide spectrum of mutations in genes causative for familial hypercholesterolemia. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adult Antibodies, Monoclonal Apolipoprotein B-100 Biomarkers, Pharmacological Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions Endosomal Sorting Complexes Required for Transport Female Genotype Heterozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Phosphoproteins Proprotein Convertase 9 Receptors, LDL || Mutation(s) in genes involved in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) pathway are typically the underlying cause of familial hypercholesterolemia. The objective of the study was to examine the influence of genotype on treatment responses with alirocumab. Patients from 6 trials (n = 1191, including 758 alirocumab-treated; Clinicaltrials.gov identifiers: NCT01266876; NCT01507831; NCT01623115; NCT01709500; NCT01617655; NCT01709513) were sequenced for mutations in LDLR, apolipoprotein B (APOB), proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9), LDLR adaptor protein 1, and signal-transducing adaptor protein 1 genes. New mutations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. One or more specific gene mutations were found in 898 patients (75%): 387 and 437 patients had heterozygous LDLR defective and negative mutations, respectively; 46 had a heterozygous APOB-defective mutation; 8 patients had a heterozygous PCSK9 gain-of-function mutation; 293 (25%) had no identifiable mutation in the genes investigated. LDL cholesterol reductions at Week 24 were generally similar across genotypes: 48.3% (n = 131) and 54.3% (n = 89) in LDLR-defective heterozygotes with alirocumab 75 mg Q2W (with possible increase to 150 mg at Week 12) and 150 mg Q2W, respectively; 49.7% (n = 168) and 60.7% (n = 88) in LDLR-negative heterozygotes; 54.1% (n = 20) and 50.1% (n = 6) in APOB-defective heterozygotes; 60.5% (n = 5) and 94.0% (n = 1) in PCSK9 heterozygotes; and 44.9% (n = 85) and 55.4% (n = 69) in patients with no identified mutations. Overall rates of treatment-emergent adverse events were similar for alirocumab vs controls (placebo in 5 trials, ezetimibe control or atorvastatin calibrator arm in 1 trial), with only a higher rate of injection-site reactions with alirocumab. In this large patient cohort, individuals with a wide spectrum of mutations in genes underlying familial hypercholesterolemia responded substantially and similarly to alirocumab treatment.",4
"High prevalence of pathogenic mutations in patients with early-onset dementia detected by sequence analyses of four different genes. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Aged, 80 and over Alzheimer Disease Amyloid Amyloid beta-Protein Precursor Continental Population Groups DNA Mutational Analysis Female Humans Male Membrane Proteins Middle Aged Pedigree Presenilin-1 Presenilin-2 Prion Diseases Prion Proteins Prions Protein Precursors || Clinical differential diagnosis of early-onset dementia (EOD) includes familial Alzheimer disease (FAD) and hereditary prion disease. In both disease entities, postmortem brain histopathological examination is essential for unambiguous diagnosis. Mutations in the genes encoding the presenilins (PS1 and PS2) and amyloid precursor protein (APP) are associated with FAD, whereas mutations in the prion protein (PrP) gene are associated with prion disease. To investigate the proportion of EOD attributable to known genes, we prospectively (i.e., antemortem) screened these four genes for mutations by sequencing genomic PCR products from patients with EOD before age 60 years. Family history for dementia was positive (PFH) in 16 patients, negative (NFH) in 17 patients, and unknown (UFH) in 3 patients. In 12 patients, we found five novel mutations (in PS1, F105L; in PS2, T122P and M239I; and in PrP, Q160X and T188K) and five previously reported mutations (in APP, in three patients who were most likely unrelated, V717I; in PS1, A79V and M139V; and in PrP, P102L and T183A) that are all considered to be disease causing. Of these 12 patients, 9 had PFH. This indicates a detection rate of 56% (9/16) in patients with PFH. We found two mutations (APP V717I) in two of the three UFH patients, and only one mutation (PrP T188K) in 1 of the 17 patients with NFH. We conclude that because of the lack of specific antemortem diagnostic markers for FAD and hereditary prion disease, all four genes should be included in a molecular diagnostic program in patients with EOD who had PFH.",4
"Reduced penetrance of autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia in a high percentage of families: importance of genetic testing in the entire family. || Adolescent Adult Aged Animals Apolipoprotein B-100 Apolipoproteins B COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops Child Cholesterol, LDL Family Health Female Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutagenesis Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Sequence Analysis, DNA Serine Endopeptidases Spain || Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemias (ADHs) are characterised by increased plasma levels of total and LDL cholesterol, predisposing to premature atherosclerosis. ADHs comprise several diseases with undistinguishable phenotype, caused by mutations in different genes: LDLR, APOB and PCSK9. Genetic studies are usually performed in patients with altered cholesterol levels. However, some persons carrying pathogenic mutations are normocholesterolemic and there are no further studies about this subject. We have studied the frequency of families and individuals carrying ADH mutations who do not present the disease in Spanish population. We have analysed genes known to cause ADH by direct sequencing in 24 ADH families (215 members). Functional effect of some LDLR gene mutations was assessed by transfecting cultured cells with plasmids. Six families with mutations presented 7 mutation carriers who did not show ADH phenotype: 30% of ADH families presented normocholesterolemic individuals, and 7% of carriers of pathogenic mutations did not show ADH phenotype. We have analysed the effect of some of these mutations and they are responsible for impaired LDL receptor function. We have excluded mutations in APOB and PCSK9 genes that could reduce LDLc levels. An important percentage of ADH families presented individuals who do not show an ADH phenotype, but who are able to transmit the pathogenic mutation to their offspring. Genetic study of all subjects in ADH families should be performed in order to identify normocholesterolemic carriers that allow the detection of mutations in their descendants and the prevention of the disease consequences.",2 4
"T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia arising from familial platelet disorder. || Adult Blood Platelet Disorders Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit Family Female Humans Mutation Precursor T-Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma Translocation, Genetic || Familial platelet disorder (FPD) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder which causes moderate thrombocytopenia with or without impaired platelet function. Patients have a propensity to develop acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and various types of second hits have been postulated in the evolution to AML. However, only a few cases of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) have been reported thus far. Here, we report a family of FPD with a germ-line hemi-allelic mutation R174X in the RUNX1 gene. The proband of the family developed AML and her son had ALL of the T cell lineage. The balanced translocation t(1;7)(p34.1;q22) was detected in the lymphoblasts from the patient with ALL. This translocation was not seen in any other affected members of the family or in the bone marrow sample of this patient in complete remission. Taken together, t(1;7)(p34.1;q22) is thought to be one of the somatic second hits that predisposes FPD to acute leukemia with T cell phenotype.",2 4
"Mutations in LPL, APOC2, APOA5, GPIHBP1 and LMF1 in patients with severe hypertriglyceridaemia. || Adult Apolipoprotein A-V Apolipoprotein C-II Apolipoproteins A Carrier Proteins Female Genetic Testing Humans Hypertriglyceridemia Lipoprotein Lipase Male Membrane Proteins Molecular Epidemiology Mutation, Missense Netherlands Prevalence Receptors, Lipoprotein Severity of Illness Index || The severe forms of hypertriglyceridaemia (HTG) are caused by mutations in genes that lead to the loss of function of lipoprotein lipase (LPL). In most patients with severe HTG (TG > 10 mmol L(-1) ), it is a challenge to define the underlying cause. We investigated the molecular basis of severe HTG in patients referred to the Lipid Clinic at the Academic Medical Center Amsterdam. The coding regions of LPL, APOC2, APOA5 and two novel genes, lipase maturation factor 1 (LMF1) and GPI-anchored high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-binding protein 1 (GPIHBP1), were sequenced in 86 patients with type 1 and type 5 HTG and 327 controls. In 46 patients (54%), rare DNA sequence variants were identified, comprising variants in LPL (n = 19), APOC2 (n = 1), APOA5 (n = 2), GPIHBP1 (n = 3) and LMF1 (n = 8). In 22 patients (26%), only common variants in LPL (p.Asp36Asn, p.Asn318Ser and p.Ser474Ter) and APOA5 (p.Ser19Trp) could be identified, whereas no mutations were found in 18 patients (21%). In vitro validation revealed that the mutations in LMF1 were not associated with compromised LPL function. Consistent with this, five of the eight LMF1 variants were also found in controls and therefore cannot account for the observed phenotype. The prevalence of mutations in LPL was 34% and mostly restricted to patients with type 1 HTG. Mutations in GPIHBP1 (n = 3), APOC2 (n = 1) and APOA5 (n = 2) were rare but the associated clinical phenotype was severe. Routine sequencing of candidate genes in severe HTG has improved our understanding of the molecular basis of this phenotype associated with acute pancreatitis and may help to guide future individualized therapeutic strategies.",4
"Somatic MYH7, MYBPC3, TPM1, TNNT2 and TNNI3 mutations in sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adult Aged Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Female Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Tropomyosin Troponin T || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a clinically heterogeneous genetic heart disease characterized by left ventricular hypertrophy in the absence of another disease that could explain the wall thickening. Elucidation of the genetic basis of HCM lead to the identification of several genes encoding sarcomeric proteins, such as MYH7, MYBPC3, TPM1, TNNT2, and TNNI3. Sarcomeric genes are mutated in approximately 40% of HCM patients and a possible explanation for the incomplete yield of mutation-positive HCM may be somatic mutations. We studied 104 unrelated patients with non-familial HCM. Patients underwent clinical evaluation and mutation screening of 5 genes implicated in HCM (MYH7, MYBPC3, TPM1, TNNT2, and TNNI3) in genomic DNA isolated from resected cardiac tissue; 41 of 104 were found to carry a mutation, but as several patients carried the same mutations, the total amount of different mutations was 37; 20 of these mutations have been previously described, and pathogenicity has been assessed. To determine the effect of the 17 new mutations an in silico assay was performed and it predicted that 4 variants were damaging mutations. All identified variants were also seen in the DNA isolated from the corresponding blood, which demonstrated the absence of somatic mutations. Somatic mutations in MYH7, MYBPC3, TPM1, TNNT2, and TNNI3 do not represent an important etiologic pathway in HCM.",4
"Melanocortin 4 receptor mutations in a large cohort of severely obese adults: prevalence, functional classification, genotype-phenotype relationship, and lack of association with binge eating. || Adult Amino Acid Sequence Body Mass Index Cohort Studies DNA Feeding and Eating Disorders Female Gene Frequency Genotype Heterozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Obesity Phenotype Prospective Studies Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Cell Surface Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction alpha-MSH || Heterozygous mutations in the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) gene are the most common monogenic form of severe obesity in children. There are conflicting reports regarding the prevalence, nature, and pathogenic effects of MC4R mutations in adults with severe late-onset obesity. Our objective was to determine the prevalence of MC4R mutations in a cohort of severely obese adults and to determine the clinical phenotype and the phenotype-genotype relationship within adult MC4R mutation carriers. We conducted an observational study at a referral center. Participants included 769 adult patients with body mass index of at least 35 kg/m(2) and 444 nonobese control individuals. There were no interventions. We assessed the prevalence of pathogenic MC4R mutations, functional characteristics of the detected mutations, phenotype, and phenotype-genotype relationship within mutation carriers. The global prevalence of obesity-specific MC4R mutations was 2.6%, and the 95% confidence interval (CI(95)) was 1.5-3.7. The prevalence of MC4R mutations was similar in patients developing obesity in childhood (2.83%; CI(95), 0.9-4.8) and in patients with a later onset of the disease (2.35%; CI(95), 0.9-3.8). Adult obese MC4R mutation carriers did not present with binge eating or with any specific clinical phenotype. The severity of the functional alterations of the mutated MC4Rs and in particular the intracellular retention of the receptor correlates both with the severity and the onset of the obesity in the mutation carriers. Obese adult carriers of functionally relevant MC4R mutations do not specifically present with binge-eating disorder or a history of early-onset obesity. The onset and severity of the obesity in the carriers is related to the functional severity of the MC4R mutations.",4 0
"Successful treatment of an unresectable choroid plexus carcinoma in a patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. ||  || Choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC) is an uncommon central nervous system tumor requiring complete surgical excision for favorable outcome. The authors report the successful treatment of a 2-year-old patient with widely disseminated CPC and Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Following a partial resection of the tumor the patient received chemotherapy consisting of cyclophosphamide, etoposide, and carboplatin. There were no additional surgical procedures and radiation was not administered. Remarkably, the patient remains without evidence of active disease more than 3 years from the completion of therapy. Additional studies are necessary to determine whether this treatment plan can be beneficial to other patients with CPC and whether the patient's p53 mutation had an effect on outcome.",4
"Pompe disease in a Brazilian series: clinical and molecular analyses with identification of nine new mutations. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Brazil Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II or acid maltase deficiency) is an inherited autosomal recessive deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA), with predominant manifestations of skeletal muscle weakness. A broad range of studies have been published focusing on Pompe patients from different countries, but none from Brazil. We investigated 41 patients with either infantile-onset (21 cases) or late-onset (20 cases) disease by muscle pathology, enzyme activity and GAA gene mutation screening. Molecular analyses identified 71 mutant alleles from the probands, nine of which are novel (five missense mutations c.136T > G, c.650C > T, c.1456G > C, c.1834C > T, and c.1905C > A, a splice-site mutation c.1195-2A > G, two deletions c.18_25del and c.2185delC, and one nonsense mutation c.643G > T). Interestingly, the c.1905C > A variant was detected in four unrelated patients and may represent a common Brazilian Pompe mutation. The c.2560C > T severe mutation was frequent in our population suggesting a high prevalence in Brazil. Also, eight out of the 21 infantile-onset patients have two truncating mutations predicted to abrogate protein expression. Of the ten late-onset patients who do not carry the common late-onset intronic mutation c.-32-13T > G, five (from three separate families) carry the recently described intronic mutation, c.-32-3C > A, and one sibpair carries the novel missense mutation c.1781G > C in combination with known severe mutation c.1941C > G. The association of these variants (c.1781G > C and c.-32-3C > A) with late-onset disease suggests that they allow for some residual activity in these patients. Our findings help to characterize Pompe disease in Brazil and support the need for additional studies to define the wide clinical and pathological spectrum observed in this disease.",1 4
"Unravelling the pathogenic role and genotype-phenotype correlation of the USH2A p.(Cys759Phe) variant among Spanish families. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Amino Acid Substitution Blindness Extracellular Matrix Proteins Genetic Association Studies Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Kaplan-Meier Estimate Middle Aged Retinitis Pigmentosa Spain Usher Syndromes || Mutations in USH2A cause both isolated Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) and Usher syndrome (that implies RP and hearing impairment). One of the most frequent variants identified in this gene and among these patients is the p.(Cys759Phe) change. However, the pathogenic role of this allele has been questioned since it was found in homozygosity in two healthy siblings of a Spanish family. To assess the causative role of USH2A p.(Cys759Phe) in autosomal recessive RP (ARRP) and Usher syndrome type II (USH2) and to establish possible genotype-phenotype correlations associated with p.(Cys759Phe), we performed a comprehensive genetic and clinical study in patients suffering from any of the two above-mentioned diseases and carrying at least one p.(Cys759Phe) allele. Diagnosis was set according to previously reported protocols. Genetic analyses were performed by using classical molecular and Next-Generation Sequencing approaches. Probands of 57 unrelated families were molecularly studied and 63 patients belonging to these families were phenotypically evaluated. Molecular analysis characterized 100% of the cases, identifying: 11 homozygous patients for USH2A p.(Cys759Phe), 42 compound heterozygous patients (12 of them with another missense USH2A pathogenic variant and 30 with a truncating USH2A variant), and 4 patients carrying the p.(Cys759Phe) allele and a pathogenic variant in another RP gene (PROM1, CNGB1 or RP1). No additional causative variants were identified in symptomatic homozygous patients. Statistical analysis of clinical differences between zygosity states yielded differences (p≤0.05) in age at diagnosis of RP and hypoacusis, and progression of visual field loss. Homozygosity of p.(Cys759Phe) and compound heterozygosity with another USH2A missense variant is associated with ARRP or ARRP plus late onset hypoacusis (OR = 20.62, CI = 95%, p = 0.041). The present study supports the role of USH2A p.(Cys759Phe) in ARRP and USH2 pathogenesis, and demonstrates the clinical differences between different zygosity states. Phenotype-genotype correlations may guide the genetic characterization based upon specific clinical signs and may advise on the clinical management and prognosis based upon a specific genotype.",2 1 4
"A novel de novo CDH1 germline variant aids in the classification of carboxy-terminal E-cadherin alterations predicted to escape nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. ||  || Most truncating cadherin 1 (CDH1) pathogenic alterations confer an elevated lifetime risk of diffuse gastric cancer (DGC) and lobular breast cancer (LBC). However, transcripts containing carboxy-terminal premature stop codons have been demonstrated to escape the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway, and gastric and breast cancer risks associated with these truncations should be carefully evaluated. A female patient underwent multigene panel testing because of a personal history of invasive LBC diagnosed at age 54, which identified the germlineCDH1 nonsense alteration, c.2506G>T (p.Glu836*), in the last exon of the gene. Subsequent parental testing for the alteration was negative and additional short tandem repeat analysis confirmed the familial relationships and the de novo occurrence in the proband. Based on the de novo occurrence, clinical history, and rarity in general population databases, this alteration was classified as a likely pathogenic variant. This is the most carboxy-terminal pathogenic alteration reported to date. Additionally, this alteration contributed to the classification of six other upstreamCDH1 carboxy-terminal truncating variants as pathogenic or likely pathogenic. Identifying the most distal pathogenic alteration provides evidence to classify other carboxy-terminal truncating variants as either pathogenic or benign, a fundamental step to offering presymptomatic screening and prophylactic procedures to the appropriate patients.",4
"A novel nonsense mutation in the melanocortin-4 receptor associated with obesity in a Spanish population. || Adult Amino Acid Sequence Case-Control Studies Codon, Nonsense Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Obesity Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Corticotropin || In recent years, several groups have reported dominant inheritance of obesity conferred by missense, nonsense and frameshift mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor gene (MC4R). Hence, MC4R is involved in the most common monogenic form of human obesity described so far. In this context, we screened a Spanish population, composed of obese subjects and normal weight controls, for mutations in the MC4-R by single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP). Overall 313 individuals, 159 obese subjects (body mass index: BMI: 37.6 kg/m(2), 95% CI: 36.7-38.5 kg/m(2)) and 154 normal weight control subjects (BMI: 22.3 kg/m(2), 95% CI: 22.0-22.6 kg/m(2)) were screened for MC4-R mutations. We detected a novel nonsense mutation at codon 16 of the MC4-R in an obese female (BMI: 30.0 kg/m(2)) and a previously described missense mutation (Val-253-Ile) located within the sixth trans-membrane domain of the MC4-R in a normal weight individual (BMI: 19.0 kg/m(2)). The polymorphism Val-103-Ile was detected in one obese individual, while four subjects (two cases and two controls) with the polymorphism Ile-251-Leu were found. We have identified a novel nonsense mutation (Trp-16-Stop) that, based on previously described frameshift and nonsense mutations, most likely results in dominantly inherited obesity. Within this Spanish population, the frequency of the Ile-251-Leu polymorphism of the MC4R was similar in obese and control subjects (about 1.3%), while the polymorphism Val-103-Ile was only detected in an obese individual (0.6%).",4
"Carrier frequency of the GJB2 mutations that cause hereditary hearing loss in the Japanese population. || Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Asian Continental Ancestry Group Connexin 26 Connexins Female Gene Frequency Hearing Loss Humans Japan Male Middle Aged || Hearing impairment is one of the most common sensory disorders that affect ~1 in 1000 children, and half of them are considered to be hereditary. Information about the carrier frequencies of mutations that underlie autosomal recessive disorders is indispensable for accurate genetic counseling to predict the probability of patients' children's disease. However, there have been few reports specific to the Japanese population. GJB2 mutations are reported to be the most frequent cause of hereditary hearing loss, and the mutation spectrum and frequency of GJB2 mutations were reported to vary among different ethnic groups. In this study, we investigated the carrier frequency of GJB2 mutations and the mutation spectrum in 509 individuals randomly selected from the general Japanese population. We show that the carrier frequencies of the two most common pathogenic mutations are 1.57% (8/509) for c.235delC and 1.77% (9/509) for p.Val37Ile. In addition to these mutations, we found two pathogenic variants (p.[Gly45Glu;Tyr136*] and p.Arg143Trp), and the total carrier frequency was estimated to be around 3.73% (19/509). We also detected six unclassified variants, including two novel variants (p.Cys60Tyr and p.Phe106Leu), with the former predicted to be pathogenic. These findings will provide indispensable information for genetic counseling in the Japanese population.",4
"The molecular basis of familial hypercholesterolaemia in Turkish patients. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool Frameshift Mutation Gene Deletion Genetic Heterogeneity Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Receptors, LDL Turkey || Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disorder of lipoprotein metabolism. In the majority of patients FH is caused by mutations in the gene for the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), and to date more than 700 mutations have been reported worldwide. In this study, 36 paediatric patients with a clinical diagnosis of FH (20 homozygous and 16 heterozygotes) were screened for mutations in the LDLR gene. Each exon, with intron-exon junctions, was screened by capillary fluorescent SSCP (F-SSCP) and heteroduplex analysis. Samples showing different band patterns were sequenced. Ten novel (including three frame shift small deletions or insertions) and seven known mutations were detected. A total of 37 out of the predicted 56 FH-causing alleles were identified (66.1%). No patients with the R3500Q mutation in the APOB gene were found. W556R was the most common mutation, explaining 21.4% of the predicted defective LDLR alleles. The novel sequence changes were deemed to be pathogenic if they altered a conserved amino acid (L143P, D147E, Q233H-C234G, C347G) or occurred in or close to a splice site (IVS 16+5) and were absent in DNA from 50 healthy Turkish subjects. These data confirm the genetic heterogeneity of FH in Turkey, and demonstrate the usefulness of F-SSCP for mutation detection.",3 4
"LEOPARD syndrome: clinical dilemmas in differential diagnosis of RASopathies. || Child Diagnosis, Differential Echocardiography Facies Heterozygote Humans LEOPARD Syndrome Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Middle Aged Mutation Neurofibromatoses Noonan Syndrome Phenotype Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 || Diagnosis within RASopathies still represents a challenge. Nevertheless, many efforts have been made by clinicians to identify specific clinical features which might help in differentiating one disorder from another. Here, we describe a child initially diagnosed with Neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome. The follow-up of the proband, the clinical evaluation of his father together with a gene-by-gene testing approach led us to the proper diagnosis. We report a 8-year-old male with multiple café-au-lait macules, several lentigines and dysmorphic features that suggest Noonan syndrome initially diagnosed with Neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome. However, after a few years of clinical and ophthalmological follow-up, the absence of typical features of Neurofibromatosis type 1 and the lack of NF1 mutation led us to reconsider the original diagnosis. A new examination of the patient and his similarly affected father, who was initially referred as healthy, led us to suspect LEOPARD syndrome, The diagnosis was then confirmed by the occurrence in both patients of a heterozygous mutation c.1403 C > T, p.(Thr468Met), of PTPN11. Subsequently, the proband was also found to have type-1 Arnold-Chiari malformation in association with syringomyelia. Our experience suggests that differential clinical diagnosis among RASopathies remains ambiguous and raises doubts on the current diagnostic clinical criteria. In some cases, genetic tests represent the only conclusive proof for a correct diagnosis and, consequently, for establishing individual prognosis and providing adequate follow-up. Thus, molecular testing represents an essential tool in differential diagnosis of RASophaties. This view is further strengthened by the increasing accessibility of new sequencing techniques.Finally, to our knowledge, the described case represents the third report of the occurrence of Arnold Chiari malformation and the second description of syringomyelia with LEOPARD syndrome.",2 4
"Severe neonatal manifestations of Costello syndrome. || Abnormalities, Multiple Amino Acid Substitution Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Craniofacial Abnormalities Female Genes, ras Humans Infant, Newborn Male Mutation Mutation, Missense Phenotype Polyhydramnios Pregnancy Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras) Syndrome || Costello syndrome (CS) is due to mutations in HRAS, with the most common mutation being c.34G>A (p.G12S), found in most patients in all the published series. A small number of less common mutations have been reported. HRAS mutation analysis has been undertaken in 74 predominantly British patients with a possible diagnosis of CS. A HRAS mutation was found in 27 patients, 15 of whom have been previously reported. PHENOTYPE ANALYSIS: Four cases had an unusually severe phenotype, associated in three cases with two unusual mutations, c.35G>A, p.G12D in two cases and c.34G>T, p.G12C in the other. Hypoglycaemia, renal abnormalities, severe early cardiomyopathy, congenital lung and airway abnormalities, pleural and pericardial effusion, chylous ascites and pulmonary lymphangectasia are confirmed as part of the clinical spectrum seen in CS. A lung pathology resembling alveolar capillary dysplasia is reported in one case. These cases illustrate that the diagnosis of CS may be difficult in the newborn period, and should be considered in the differential diagnosis of the sick newborn infant with multisystem disease. Study of more cases will be required to establish if there is a definite association between severe disease and less common mutations.",4
"A molecular screening strategy based on beta-myosin heavy chain, cardiac myosin binding protein C and troponin T genes in Italian patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. ||  || Mutations causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) have been described in nine different genes of the sarcomere. Three genes account for most known mutations: beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH7), cardiac myosin binding protein C (MYBPC3) and cardiac troponin T (TNNT2). Their prevalence in Italian HCM patients is unknown. Thus, we prospectively assessed a molecular screening strategy of these three genes in a consecutive population with HCM from two Italian centres. Comprehensive screening of MYBPC3, MYH7 and TNNT2 was performed in 88 unrelated HCM patients by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and automatic sequencing. We identified 32 mutations in 50 patients (57%); 16 were novel. The prevalence rates for MYBPC3, MYH7 and TNNT2 were 32%, 17% and 2%, respectively. MYBPC3 mutations were 18, including two frameshift, five splice-site and two nonsense. All were 'private' except insC1065 and R502Q, present in three and two patients, respectively. Moreover, E258K was found in 14% of patients, suggesting a founder effect. MYH7 mutations were 12, all missense; seven were novel. In TNNT2, only two mutations were found. In addition, five patients had a complex genotype [i.e. carried a double MYBPC3 mutation (n = 2), or were double heterozygous for mutations in MYBPC3 and MYH7 (n = 3)]. The first comprehensive evaluation of MYBPC3, MYH7 and TNNT2 in an Italian HCM population allowed a genetic diagnosis in 57% of the patients. These data support a combined analysis of the three major sarcomeric genes as a rational and cost-effective initial approach to the molecular screening of HCM.",4
"KCNQ4, a novel potassium channel expressed in sensory outer hair cells, is mutated in dominant deafness. || Amino Acid Sequence Animals Chromosome Mapping Cloning, Molecular DNA, Complementary Ear, Inner Female Gene Expression Regulation Genes, Dominant Hair Cells, Auditory, Outer Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans KCNQ Potassium Channels Mice Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Oocytes Pedigree Potassium Channels Potassium Channels, Voltage-Gated Xenopus laevis || Potassium channels regulate electrical signaling and the ionic composition of biological fluids. Mutations in the three known genes of the KCNQ branch of the K+ channel gene family underlie inherited cardiac arrhythmias (in some cases associated with deafness) and neonatal epilepsy. We have now cloned KCNQ4, a novel member of this branch. It maps to the DFNA2 locus for a form of nonsyndromic dominant deafness. In the cochlea, it is expressed in sensory outer hair cells. A mutation in this gene in a DFNA2 pedigree changes a residue in the KCNQ4 pore region. It abolishes the potassium currents of wild-type KCNQ4 on which it exerts a strong dominant-negative effect. Whereas mutations in KCNQ1 cause deafness by affecting endolymph secretion, the mechanism leading to KCNQ4-related hearing loss is intrinsic to outer hair cells.",2 4 0
"A spectrum of PCSK9 alleles contributes to plasma levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. || Alleles Amino Acid Sequence Cholesterol, LDL Evolution, Molecular Female Gene Frequency Haplotypes Humans Hypercholesterolemia Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Serine Endopeptidases || Selected missense mutations in the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 serine protease gene (PCSK9) cause autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia, whereas nonsense mutations in the same gene are associated with low plasma levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C). Here, DNA sequencing and chip-based oligonucleotide hybridization were used to determine whether other sequence variations in PCSK9 contribute to differences in LDL-C levels. The coding regions of PCSK9 were sequenced in the blacks and whites from the Dallas Heart Study (n=3,543) who had the lowest (<5th percentile) and highest (>95th percentile) plasma levels of LDL-C. Of the 17 missense variants identified, 3 (R46L, L253F, and A443T) were significantly and reproducibly associated with lower plasma levels of LDL-C (reductions ranging from 3.5% to 30%). None of the low-LDL-C variants were associated with increased hepatic triglyceride content, as measured by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy. This finding is most consistent with the reduction in LDL-C being caused primarily by accelerating LDL clearance, rather than by reduced lipoprotein production. Association studies with 93 noncoding single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at the PCSK9 locus identified 3 SNPs associated with modest differences in plasma LDL-C levels. Thus, a spectrum of sequence variations ranging in frequency (from 0.2% to 34%) and magnitude of effect (from a 3% increase to a 49% decrease) contribute to interindividual differences in LDL-C levels. These findings reveal that PCSK9 activity is a major determinant of plasma levels of LDL-C in humans and make it an attractive therapeutic target for LDL-C lowering.",4
"Familial hypercholesterolemia in St-Petersburg: the known and novel mutations found in the low density lipoprotein receptor gene in Russia. || Apolipoproteins B Base Sequence Codon, Nonsense DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Female Frameshift Mutation Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Mutation Mutation, Missense Pedigree Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Receptors, LDL Russia || Familial hypercholesterolemia is a human monogenic disease caused by population-specific mutations in the low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene. Despite thirteen different mutations of the LDL receptor gene were reported from Russia prior to 2003, the whole spectrum of disease-causing gene alterations in this country is poorly known and requires further investigation provided by the current study. Forty-five patients with clinical diagnosis of FH were tested for the apolipoprotein B (apoB) mutation R3500Q by restriction fragment length analysis. After exclusion of R3500Q mutation high-sensitive fluorescent single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis and automatic DNA sequencing were used to search for mutations in the LDL receptor gene. We found twenty one rare sequence variations of the LDL receptor gene. Nineteen were probably pathogenic mutations, and two (P518P, T705I) were considered as neutral ones. Among the mutations likely to be pathogenic, eight were novel (c.670-671insG, C249X, c.936-940del5, c.1291-1331del41, W422X, c.1855-1856insA, D601N, C646S), and eleven (Q12X, IVS3+1G>A, c.651-653del3, E207X, c.925-931del7, C308Y, L380H, c.1302delG, IVS9+1G>A, V776M, V806I) have already been described in other populations. None of the patients had the R3500Q mutation in the apoB gene. Nineteen pathogenic mutations in the LDL receptor gene in 23 probands were identified. Two mutations c.925-931del7 and L380H are shared by St.-Petersburg population with neighbouring Finland and several other mutations with Norway, Sweden or Denmark, i.e. countries from the Baltic Sea region. Only four mutations (c.313+1G>A, c.651-653del3, C308Y and W422X) were recurrent as all those were found in two unrelated families. By this study the number of known mutations in the LDL receptor gene in St.-Petersburg area was increased nearly threefold. Analysis of all 34 low density lipoprotein receptor gene mutations found in St.-Petersburg argues against strong founder effect in Russian familial hypercholesterolemia.",4
"Novel genotype-phenotype associations demonstrated by high-throughput sequencing in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Age Factors Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Child DNA Mutational Analysis Death, Sudden, Cardiac Female Genetic Association Studies Genetic Predisposition to Disease High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Kaplan-Meier Estimate London Male Middle Aged Muscle Proteins Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Predictive Value of Tests Retrospective Studies Risk Factors Young Adult || A predictable relation between genotype and disease expression is needed in order to use genetic testing for clinical decision-making in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). The primary aims of this study were to examine the phenotypes associated with sarcomere protein (SP) gene mutations and test the hypothesis that variation in non-sarcomere genes modifies the phenotype. Unrelated and consecutive patients were clinically evaluated and prospectively followed in a specialist clinic. High-throughput sequencing was used to analyse 41 genes implicated in inherited cardiac conditions. Variants in SP and non-SP genes were tested for associations with phenotype and survival. 874 patients (49.6±15.4 years, 67.8% men) were studied; likely disease-causing SP gene variants were detected in 383 (43.8%). Patients with SP variants were characterised by younger age and higher prevalence of family history of HCM, family history of sudden cardiac death, asymmetric septal hypertrophy, greater maximum LV wall thickness (all p values<0.0005) and an increased incidence of cardiovascular death (p=0.012). Similar associations were observed for individual SP genes. Patients with ANK2 variants had greater maximum wall thickness (p=0.0005). Associations at a lower level of significance were demonstrated with variation in other non-SP genes. Patients with HCM caused by rare SP variants differ with respect to age at presentation, family history of the disease, morphology and survival from patients without SP variants. Novel associations for SP genes are reported and, for the first time, we demonstrate possible influence of variation in non-SP genes associated with other forms of cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia syndromes on the clinical phenotype of HCM.",4
"Visual Prognosis in USH2A-Associated Retinitis Pigmentosa Is Worse for Patients with Usher Syndrome Type IIa Than for Those with Nonsyndromic Retinitis Pigmentosa. || Adolescent Adult Aged Blindness DNA Mutational Analysis Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Follow-Up Studies Genetic Association Studies Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Prognosis Retinitis Pigmentosa Usher Syndromes Vision, Low Visual Acuity Visual Fields || USH2A mutations are an important cause of retinitis pigmentosa (RP) with or without congenital sensorineural hearing impairment. We studied genotype-phenotype correlations and compared visual prognosis in Usher syndrome type IIa and nonsyndromic RP. Clinic-based, longitudinal, multicenter study. Consecutive patients with Usher syndrome type IIa (n = 152) and nonsyndromic RP (n = 73) resulting from USH2A mutations from ophthalmogenetic clinics in the Netherlands and Belgium. Data on clinical characteristics, visual acuity, visual field measurements, retinal imaging, and electrophysiologic features were extracted from medical charts over a mean follow-up of 9 years. Cumulative lifetime risks of low vision and blindness were estimated using Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. Low vision and blindness. Participant groups had similar distributions of gender (48% vs. 45% males in Usher syndrome type IIa vs. nonsydromic RP; P = 0.8), ethnicity (97% vs. 99% European; P = 0.3), and median follow-up time (6.5 years vs. 3 years; P = 0.3). Usher syndrome type IIa patients demonstrated symptoms at a younger age (median age, 15 years vs. 25 years; P < 0.001), were diagnosed earlier (median age, 26 years vs. 36.5 years; P < 0.001), and became visually impaired 13 years earlier (median age, 41 years vs. 54 years; P < 0.001) based on VF and 18 years earlier based on VA (median age, 54 years vs. 72 years; P < 0.001) than nonsyndromic RP patients. The presence of 2 truncating mutations in USH2A was associated mostly with the syndromic phenotype, whereas other combinations were present in both groups. We found novel variants in Usher syndrome type IIa (25%) and nonsyndromic RP (19%): 29 missense mutations, 10 indels, 14 nonsense mutations, 9 frameshift mutations, and 5 splice-site mutations. Most patients with USH2A-associated RP have severe visual impairment by age 50. However, those with Usher syndrome type IIa have an earlier decline of visual function and a higher cumulative risk of visual impairment than those without nonsyndromic RP. Complete loss of function of the USH2A protein predisposes to Usher syndrome type IIa, but remnant protein function can lead to RP with or without hearing loss.",4
"Transcriptional functionality of germ line p53 mutants influences cancer phenotype. || Adolescent Adult Aged Child Genes, p53 Germ-Line Mutation Humans Middle Aged Mutation Neoplasms Phenotype Precancerous Conditions Transcription, Genetic Transcriptional Activation Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || The TP53 tumor suppressor gene encodes a sequence-specific transcription factor that is able to transactivate several sets of genes, the promoters of which include appropriate response elements. Although human cancers frequently contain mutated p53, the alleles as well as the clinical expression are often heterogeneous. Germ line mutations of TP53 result in cancer proneness syndromes known as Li-Fraumeni, Li-Fraumeni--like, and nonsyndromic predisposition with or without family history. p53 mutants can be classified as partial deficiency alleles or severe deficiency alleles depending on their ability to transactivate a set of human target sequences, as measured using a standardized yeast-based assay (see http://www.umd.be:2072/index.html). We have investigated the extent to which the functional features of p53 mutant alleles determine clinical features in patients who have inherited these alleles and have developed cancer. We retrieved clinical data from the IARC database (see http://www.p53.iarc.fr/Germline.html) for all cancer patients with germ line p53 mutations and applied stringent statistical evaluations to compare the functional classification of p53 alleles with clinical phenotypes. Our analyses reveal that partial deficiency alleles are associated with a milder family history (P = 0.007), a lower numbers of tumors (P = 0.007), and a delayed disease onset (median, 31 versus 15 years; P = 0.007) which could be related to distinct tumor spectra. These findings establish for the first time significant correlations between the residual transactivation function of individual TP53 alleles and clinical variables in patients with inherited p53 mutations who develop cancer.",2 4
"Fabry Disease: prevalence of affected males and heterozygotes with pathogenic GLA mutations identified by screening renal, cardiac and stroke clinics, 1995-2017. ||  || Fabry Disease (FD), an X linked lysosomal storage disease due to pathogenic α-galactosidase A (GLA) mutations, results in two major subtypes, the early-onset Type 1 'Classic' and the Type 2 'Later-Onset' phenotypes. To identify previously unrecognised patients, investigators screened cardiac, renal and stroke clinics by enzyme assays. However, some screening studies did not perform confirmatoryGLA mutation analyses, and many included recently recognised 'benign/likely-benign' variants, thereby inflating prevalence estimates. Online databases were searched for all FD screening studies in high-risk clinics (1995-2017). Studies reporting GLA mutations were re-analysed for pathogenic mutations, sex and phenotype. Phenotype-specific and sex-specific prevalence rates were determined. Of 67 studies, 63 that screened 51363patients (33943M and 17420F) and provided GLA mutations were reanalysed for disease-causing mutations. Of reportedGLA mutations, benign variants occurred in 47.9% of males and 74.1% of females. The following were the revised prevalence estimates: among 36820 (23954M and 12866F) haemodialysis screenees, 0.21% males and 0.15% females; among 3074 (2031M and 1043F) renal transplant screenees, 0.25% males and no females; among 5491 (4054M and 1437F) cardiac screenees, 0.94% males and 0.90% females; and among 5978 (3904M and 2074F) stroke screenees, 0.13% males and 0.14% females. Among male and female screenees with pathogenic mutations, the type 1 Classic phenotype was predominant (~60%), except more male cardiac patients (75%) had type 2 Later-Onset phenotype. Compared with previous findings, reanalysis of 63 studies increased the screenee numbers (~3.4-fold), eliminated 20 benign/likely benign variants, and provided more accurate sex-specific and phenotype-specific prevalence estimates, ranging from ~0.13% of stroke to ~0.9% of cardiac male or female screenees.",3 4
"Medical sequencing at the extremes of human body mass. || Adult Body Weight Exons Female Gene Frequency Genes Genetic Variation Humans Male Middle Aged Obesity Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Sequence Analysis, DNA || Body weight is a quantitative trait with significant heritability in humans. To identify potential genetic contributors to this phenotype, we resequenced the coding exons and splice junctions of 58 genes in 379 obese and 378 lean individuals. Our 96-Mb survey included 21 genes associated with monogenic forms of obesity in humans or mice, as well as 37 genes that function in body weight-related pathways. We found that the monogenic obesity-associated gene group was enriched for rare nonsynonymous variants unique to the obese population compared with the lean population. In addition, computational analysis predicted a greater fraction of deleterious variants within the obese cohort. Together, these data suggest that multiple rare alleles contribute to obesity in the population and provide a medical sequencing-based approach to detect them.",2 4
"Melanocortin-4 receptor gene: case-control study and transmission disequilibrium test confirm that functionally relevant mutations are compatible with a major gene effect for extreme obesity. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aging Animals Body Height Body Mass Index Body Weight COS Cells Case-Control Studies Cercopithecus aethiops Child DNA Female Gene Expression Genotype Humans Linkage Disequilibrium Male Middle Aged Mutation Obesity, Morbid Odds Ratio Phenotype Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Corticotropin Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction || We initially performed a mutation screen of the coding region of the MC4R in 808 extremely obese children and adolescents and 327 underweight or normal-weight controls allowing for a case-control study. A total of 16 different missense, nonsense, and frameshift mutations were found in the obese study group; five of these have not been observed previously. In vitro assays revealed that nine [the haplotype (Y35X; D37V) was counted as one mutation] of the 16 mutations led to impaired cAMP responses, compared with wild-type receptor constructs. In contrast, only one novel missense mutation was detected in the controls, which did not alter receptor function. The association test based on functionally relevant mutations was positive (P = 0.006, Fisher's exact test, one-sided). We proceeded by screening a total of 1040 parents of 520 of the aforementioned obese young index patients to perform transmission disequilibrium tests. The 11 parental carriers of functionally relevant mutations transmitted the mutation in 81.8% (P = 0.033; exact one-sided McNemar test). These results support the hypothesis that these MC4R mutations represent major gene effects for obesity.",4 0
"Fabry disease: polymorphic haplotypes and a novel missense mutation in the GLA gene. || Adult Child Fabry Disease Female Haplotypes Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Phenotype alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease: polymorphic haplotypes and a novel missense mutation in the GLA gene. Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder with a heterogeneous spectrum of clinical manifestations that are caused by the deficiency of α-galactosidase A (α-Gal-A) activity. Although useful for diagnosis in males, enzyme activity is not a reliable biochemical marker in heterozygous females due to random X-chromosome inactivation, thus rendering DNA sequencing of the α-Gal-A gene, alpha-galactosidase gene (GLA), the most reliable test for the confirmation of diagnosis in females. The spectrum of GLA mutations is highly heterogeneous. Many polymorphic GLA variants have been described, but it is unclear if haplotypes formed by combinations of such variants correlate with FD, thus complicating molecular diagnosis in females with normal α-Gal-A activity. We tested 67 female probands with clinical manifestations that may be associated with FD and 110 control males with normal α-Gal-A activity. Five different combinations of GLA polymorphic variants were identified in 14 of the 67 females, whereas clearcut pathogenetic alterations, p.Met51Ile and p.Met290Leu, were identified in two cases. The latter has not been reported so far, and both mutant forms were found to be responsive to the pharmacological chaperone deoxygalactonojirimycin (DGJ; migalastat hydrochloride). Analysis of the male control population, as well as male relatives of a suspected FD female proband, permitted the identification of seven different GLA gene haplotypes in strong linkage disequilibrium. The identification of haplotypes in control males provides evidence against their involvement in the development of FD phenotypic manifestations.",3 4
"Mutations in GCK and HNF-1alpha explain the majority of cases with clinical diagnosis of MODY in Spain. || Adolescent Blood Glucose Child DNA Mutational Analysis Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Genotype Glucokinase Glucose Tolerance Test Haplotypes Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta Humans Insulin Resistance Male Obesity Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Spain || The aim of this study was to group patients with MODY (maturity-onset diabetes of the young) according to the genetic alterations underlying the disease and to investigate their clinical characteristics. Molecular analysis of GCK (MODY2), HNF-1alpha (MODY3), HNF-4alpha (MODY1) and HNF-1beta (MODY5) genes was performed by DNA sequencing in 95 unrelated index probands (47M/48F; mean age 9.9 +/- 5.2 years) with clinical diagnosis of MODY. After classification into MODY subtypes according to the genetic alterations, clinical characteristics were compared between the groups. Seventy-six families were shown to carry mutations in GCK (34 of them previously unreported), eight families presented HNF-1alpha mutations, and a large genomic rearrangement in HNF-1beta was found in a family. No alteration was found in HNF-4alpha. Thus, relative frequencies in the group studied were 80% MODY2, 8.5% MODY3 and 1% MODY5. Comparison of clinical parameters according to genetic status showed significant differences between MODY2 and MODY3 patients in age at diagnosis (9.4 +/- 5.4 years vs. 12.7 +/- 4.6 years), diagnosis (impaired glucose tolerance vs. diabetes), diagnostic test used (OGTT vs. fasting glucose), treatment (diet and exercise vs. insulin/oral antidiabetic agents) and birth weight (2.96 +/- 0.44 kg vs. 3.40 +/- 0.67 kg). Almost 90% of the MODY cases in the group studied are explained by mutations in the major genes GCK (MODY2) and HNF-1alpha(MODY3), although differences in the relative prevalence of each form could be partly due to patient referral bias (paediatric vs. adult). In general, patients with MODY2 were diagnosed at an earlier age in life than MODY3 patients and had a milder form of diabetes. Moreover, the majority of patients with MODY2 mutations were treated with diet whereas half of MODY3 patients received pharmacological treatment.",2 4
"Phenotypic heterogeneity in monogenic diabetes: the clinical and diagnostic utility of a gene panel-based next-generation sequencing approach. || Child, Preschool Consanguinity Diabetes Mellitus Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Genetic Testing High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Infant Male Mutation Phenotype Sequence Analysis, DNA United States || Single gene mutations that primarily affect pancreatic β-cell function account for approximately 1-2% of all cases of diabetes. Overlapping clinical features with common forms of diabetes makes diagnosis of monogenic diabetes challenging. A genetic diagnosis often leads to significant alterations in treatment, allows better prediction of disease prognosis and progression, and has implications for family members. Currently, genetic testing for monogenic diabetes relies on selection of appropriate individual genes for analysis based on the availability of often-limited phenotypic information, decreasing the likelihood of making a genetic diagnosis. We thus developed a targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) assay for the detection of mutations in 36 genes known to cause monogenic forms of diabetes, including transient or permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus (TNDM or PNDM), maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and rare syndromic forms of diabetes. A total of 95 patient samples were analyzed: 19 with known causal mutations and 76 with a clinically suggestive phenotype but lacking a genetic diagnosis. All previously identified mutations were detected, validating our assay. Pathogenic sequence changes were identified in 19 out of 76 (25%) patients: 7 of 32 (22%) NDM cases, and 12 of 44 (27%) MODY cases. In 2 NDM patients the causal mutation was not expected as consanguinity was not reported and there were no clinical features aside from diabetes. A 3 year old patient with NDM diagnosed at 3 months of age, who previously tested negative for INS, KCNJ11 and ABCC8 mutations, was found to carry a novel homozygous mutation in EIF2AK3 (associated with Wolcott-Rallison syndrome), a gene not previously suspected because consanguinity, delayed growth, abnormal bone development and hepatic complications had not been reported. Similarly, another infant without a history of consanguinity was found to have a homozygous GCK mutation causing PNDM at birth. This study demonstrates the effectiveness of multi-gene panel analysis in uncovering molecular diagnoses in patients with monogenic forms of diabetes.",4
"A Li-Fraumeni syndrome family with retained heterozygosity for a germline TP53 mutation in two tumors. || Amino Acid Sequence Female Genes, p53 Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Loss of Heterozygosity Pedigree Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || We identified a missense germline mutation (Gly245Ser) in one of the mutation hot spots of the TP53 gene in two affected members of a Li-Fraumeni syndrome family. We also analyzed their tumors, a liposarcoma and a colorectal carcinoma. Both tumors exhibited p53 protein accumulation but none of them showed loss of the wild-type allele of the TP53 gene. We reviewed all published cases of tumors in germline TP53 mutation carriers where loss of heterozygosity data were available and identified 84 tumors with loss of the wild-type allele, 57 tumors with retention of heterozygosity, and 9 tumors with loss of the allele harboring the germline mutation. Among the tumors showing p53 accumulation, we observed a significant difference in the fraction of tumors showing p53 protein accumulation between the tumors with loss of the wild-type allele and those with retention of TP53 heterozygosity. This supports the idea that the pathogenesis of tumors in germline TP53 mutation carriers does not have to be associated with loss of the wild-type TP53 allele. The product of the normal allele can potentially be inactivated by a variety of other mechanisms or, as suggested by the analysis, many of these tumors may even preserve the activity of the wild-type p53 protein.",4
"Mutations profile in Chinese patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child China DNA Mutational Analysis Echocardiography Echocardiography, Doppler Electrocardiography Exons Female Gene Frequency Humans Male Mutation Penetrance Phenotype || There are more than 1 million patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) in China, but the genetic basis is presently unknown. We investigated 100 independent patients with HCM (proband 51, sporadic 49) by sequencing the three most frequent HCM-causing genes (MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNT2). Thirty-four patients (34%) carried 25 types of mutations in the selected genes, most (14/25) were newly identified. MYH7 and MYBPC3 accounted for 41% and 18% of the familial HCM, respectively. TNNT2 mutations only caused 2% of the familial HCM. These results suggested that MYH7 and MYBPC3 were the predominant genes responsible for HCM, and TNNT2 mutation less proportionally contributed to Chinese HCM. MYH7 mutations caused HCM at younger age, more frequent syncope and ECG abnormalities compared with MYBPC3 mutations. The patients carrying R663C, Q734P, E930K in MYH7 and R130C in TNNT2 expressed malignant phenotype. R403Q in MYH7, the most common hot and malignant mutation in Caucasians, was not identified in Chinese. We confirmed the diversity of mutation profile in different populations and suggest that a global registry of HCM mutations and their phenotypes is necessary to correlate genotype with phenotype.",4
"Fabry disease: twenty-three mutations including sense and antisense CpG alterations and identification of a deletional hot-spot in the alpha-galactosidase A gene. || Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Chromosome Mapping Codon DNA Dinucleoside Phosphates Exons Family Female Gene Rearrangement Humans Lymphocytes Male Molecular Sequence Data Phenotype Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction RNA Sequence Deletion X Chromosome alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease, an X-linked inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism, results from mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A gene at Xq22.1. To determine the nature and frequency of the molecular lesions causing the classical and milder variant Fabry phenotypes, and for precise carrier detection in Fabry families, the alpha-galactosidase A coding and flanking intronic sequences from 23 unrelated Fabry hemizygotes were analyzed. In patients with the classic phenotype, 16 new missense and nonsense mutations and four small exonic gene rearrangements were identified: C52S, C56F, E59K, L89R, R100K, R112H, L131P, A143P, G144V, C172Y, D244N, N272K, A288D, W81X, Q99X, Q157X, R301X, 25del1, 333del18, 358del6, and 1020del1. The R112H mutation at a CpG dinucleotide resulted in residual activity and a mild variant phenotype while the R112C lesion caused the classic disease manifestations, defining a genotype/phenotype correlation for sense and antisense mutations at the same CpG dinucleotide. In addition, two complex rearrangements, each involving two mutational events, occurred in classic hemizygotes. Both rearrangements resulted in missense mutations that did not change the reading frame. Notably, three of the deletions occurred within 11 codons in exon 2, thereby defining a 'hot-spot' for deletions. These studies revealed that most mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A gene causing Fabry disease were private, that codons 111-122 defined a deletion hot-spot, and that different substitutions of the same codon resulted in markedly different disease phenotypes.",4
"Mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) gene in obese patients in Norway. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Amino Acid Substitution DNA Mutational Analysis Female Humans Male Mass Screening Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Norway Obesity Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 || Mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor ( MC4R) gene are the most frequent cause of monogenic forms of obesity, but the reported prevalences of mutations in obese individuals diverge, varying from 0.2 to 5.8%. The aim of this study was to assess the prevalence of MC4R mutations in obese children and adults residing in Norway. We sequenced the coding region of MC4R in 1 027 obese patients. Among these, were 644 adults with a BMI >35 kg/m(2) and 383 children with a body weight >97.5 percentile for height. Identified mutations were analyzed by family studies and a bioinformatic approach including comparative sequence analysis and prediction of impact on transmembrane helix and three dimensional structure. Nine mutations were identified, of which four were novel and five previously described. The prevalence of MC4R mutations was 1.6% in pediatric and 0.8% in adult patients. All four novel mutations, I69R, M79I, I195S, and M200del were identified among pediatric patients. M79I was found in an ethnic Norwegian patient, while the rest were identified in second generation immigrants. The previously described mutations Y35X/D37V, V95I, T150I, R236C and V253I were identified in one pediatric and five adult patients. None of the adult patients reported childhood onset of obesity. The M200del mutation was found in a homozygous state, while the rest were heterozygous. MC4R mutations are not a common cause of obesity in Norway and screening of obese patients does not appear to be warranted. The results are consistent with results from previous studies.",4
"Characterization and geographic distribution of the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene mutations in northwestern Greece. ||  || Familial Hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is a clinical syndrome characterised by elevated serum total cholesterol levels due to an increase in low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, by tendon xanthomata and clinical manifestations of ischaemic heart disease in early life. Typically, it results from mutations in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene. So far, over 600 mutations have been reported for the LDLR gene and account for FH. The nature of LDLR gene mutations is different in various ethnicities and has also regional distribution within each ethnicity. Eleven mutations have already been described in the Greek population. This report describes seven LDLR gene mutations accounting for FH in Northwestern Greece (81T>G, 517T>C, 858C>A, 1285G>A, 1352T>C, 1646G>A and 1775G>A) and their geographic distribution. We have recently described one of these mutations (1352T>C) as a novel point mutation in a Greek family originating from Northwestern Greece. Furthermore, two previously identified mutations (81T>C, 1775G>A) were also detected in the Greek FH patients for the first time. The 1775G>A mutation was responsible for all the homozygous patients in our area, indicating a founder effect. These data will favor the development of tailed information and screening programs in Northwestern Greece for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease in FH patients.",4
"Genomic analysis of inherited breast cancer among Palestinian women: Genetic heterogeneity and a founder mutation in TP53. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Arabs Breast Neoplasms Female Genetic Association Studies Genetic Heterogeneity Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Sequence Analysis, DNA Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Breast cancer among Palestinian women has lower incidence than in Europe or North America, yet is very frequently familial. We studied genetic causes of this familial clustering in a consecutive hospital-based series of 875 Palestinian patients with invasive breast cancer, including 453 women with diagnosis by age 40, or with breast or ovarian cancer in a mother, sister, grandmother or aunt (""discovery series""); and 422 women diagnosed after age 40 and with negative family history (""older-onset sporadic patient series""). Genomic DNA from women in the discovery series was sequenced for all known breast cancer genes, revealing a pathogenic mutation in 13% (61/453) of patients. These mutations were screened in all patients and in 300 Palestinian female controls, revealing 1.0% (4/422) carriers among older, nonfamilial patients and two carriers among controls. The mutational spectrum was highly heterogeneous, including pathogenic mutations in 11 different genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, ATM, CHEK2, BARD1, BRIP1, PALB2, MRE11A, PTEN and XRCC2. BRCA1 carriers were significantly more likely than other patients to have triple negative tumors (p = 0.03). The single most frequent mutation was TP53 p.R181C, which was significantly enriched in the discovery series compared to controls (p = 0.01) and was responsible for 15% of breast cancers among young onset or familial patients. TP53 p.R181C predisposed specifically to breast cancer with incomplete penetrance, and not to other Li-Fraumeni cancers. Palestinian women with young onset or familial breast cancer and their families would benefit from genetic analysis and counseling.",2 4
"Echocardiographic strain imaging to assess early and late consequences of sarcomere mutations in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Child Cohort Studies Diastole Echocardiography, Doppler Female Genotype Humans Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular Male Middle Aged Mutation Sarcomeres Systole Tropomyosin Troponin I Troponin T Ventricular Myosins || Genetic testing identifies sarcomere mutation carriers (G+) before clinical diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), allowing characterization of initial disease manifestations. Previous studies demonstrated that impaired relaxation develops before left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). The precise impact of sarcomere mutations on systolic function in early and late disease is unclear. Comprehensive echocardiography with strain imaging was performed on 146 genotyped individuals with mutations in 5 sarcomere genes. Contractile parameters were compared in 68 preclinical (G+/LVH-), 40 overt (G+/LVH+) subjects with HCM, and 38 mutation (-) normal control relatives. All subjects had normal left ventricular ejection fraction. In preclinical HCM, global and regional peak systolic strain (epsilon(sys)) and longitudinal systolic strain rate were not significantly different from controls, but early diastolic mitral annular velocity (Ea) was reduced by 13%. In overt HCM, there was a significant 27% and 14% decrease in global longitudinal epsilon(sys) and systolic strain rate, respectively, compared with both preclinical HCM and controls (P<0.013 for all comparisons), and a 33% reduction in Ea. Sarcomere mutations have disparate initial effects on diastolic and systolic functions. Preclinical HCM is characterized by impaired relaxation but preserved systolic strain. In contrast, both diastolic and longitudinal systolic abnormalities are present in overt disease despite normal ejection fraction. We propose that diastolic dysfunction is an early consequence of sarcomere mutations, whereas systolic dysfunction results from mutations combined with subsequent pathological remodeling. Identifying mechanistic pathways triggered by these mutations may begin to reshape the clinical paradigm for treatment, based on early diagnosis and disease prevention.",4
"Genetic screening for familial gastric cancer. ||  || Approximately 10% of gastric cancer cases show familial clustering but only 1-3% of gastric carcinomas arise as a result of inherited gastric cancer predisposition syndromes. Direct proof that Hereditary Gastric Cancer a genetic disease with a germline gene defect has come from the demonstration of co-segregation of germline E-cadherin (CDH1) mutations with early onset diffuse gastric cancer in families with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance (HDGC). E-cadherin is a transmembrane calcium-dependent cell-adhesion molecule involved in cell-junction formation and the maintenance of epithelial integrity. In this review, we describe frequency and type of CDH1 mutations in sporadic and familial gastric cancer. Further we demonstrate the functional significance of some CDH1 germline missense mutations found in HDGC. We also discuss the CDH1 polymorphisms that have been associated to gastric cancer. We report other types of malignancies associated to HDGC, besides diffuse gastric cancer. Moreover, we review the data available on putative alternative candidate genes screened in familial gastric cancer. Finally, we briefly discuss the role of low-penetrance genes and Helicobacter pylori in gastric cancer. This knowledge is a fundamental step towards accurate genetic counselling, in which a highly specialised pre-symptomatic therapeutic intervention should be offered.",4
"CDH1 associated gastric cancer: a report of a family and review of the literature. || Cadherins Female Gastrectomy Genetic Counseling Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Population Surveillance Stomach Neoplasms || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is an autosomal-dominant inherited form of gastric cancer associated with inactivating germline mutations in the CDH1 gene. We set out to outline the role of CDH1 in HDGC. Investigation of a family suspected as having HDGC is discussed. The role of surgery in the management of affected individuals is then examined. A search was conducted of Medline and the National Library of Medicine to identify key articles concerning CDH1 gene mutations, familial gastric cancer and gastrectomy. Further, relevant articles were obtained by manual scanning of the reference lists of identified papers. Mutation-specific CDH1 genetic testing was performed on six living family members and on gastric tissue obtained from two deceased members. CDH1 mutations cause inactivation of the cell adhesion protein E-cadherin. Carriers of the CDH1 germline gene mutation develop an aggressive, diffuse, submucosal gastric cancer at an early age. Current endoscopic screening is ineffective at detecting HDGC. The presence of a CDH1 germline gene mutation was confirmed in both deceased family members and also in four of the six living members tested. Genetic counselling and CDH1 gene mutation testing is indicated in families with suspected HDGC. In the absence of a satisfactory surveillance mechanism, prophylactic total gastrectomy would appear to be an appropriate therapeutic option in mutation carriers.",2 4
"Costello syndrome H-Ras alleles regulate cortical development. || Alleles Cell Differentiation Cell Proliferation Cells, Cultured Cerebral Cortex Electroporation Genes, ras Humans Immunohistochemistry Intellectual Disability Microscopy, Confocal Mutation Syndrome || Genetic mutations in H-Ras cause Costello syndrome (CS), a complex developmental disorder associated with cortical abnormalities and profound mental retardation. Here, we have asked whether there are perturbations in precursor cell proliferation, differentiation, or survival as a consequence of expressing CS H-Ras alleles that could explain the cognitive deficits seen in this disorder. Two different H-Ras alleles encoding mutations present in CS patients, H-RasG12V and H-RasG12S were expressed in cortical progenitors in culture and in vivo by in utero electroporation and their effects on cortical precursor cell fate examined. Expression of both mutants in cultured precursors inhibited neurogenesis and promoted proliferation and astrogenesis. In vivo, expression of either form of CS H-Ras promoted cell proliferation and inhibited neurogenesis. Moreover, these H-Ras mutants promoted premature gliogenesis, causing formation of astrocytes at a time when normal gliogenesis has not yet begun, ultimately leading to an increase in the number of astrocytes postnatally. Thus, aberrant H-Ras activation enhances neural precursor cell proliferation, and perturbs the normal genesis of neurons and glial cells, effects that likely contribute to the cortical abnormalities and cognitive dysfunction seen in CS.",4
"Diagnostic Value of SLC26A4 Mutation Status in Hereditary Hearing Loss With EVA: A PRISMA-Compliant Meta-Analysis. || Deafness Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Sulfate Transporters Vestibular Aqueduct || Many SLC26A4 mutations have been identified in patients with nonsyndromic enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA). However, the roles of SLC26A4 genotypes and phenotypes in hereditary deafness remain unexplained. This study aims to perform a meta-analysis based on the PRISMA statement to evaluate the diagnostic value of SLC26A4 mutant alleles and their correlations with multiethnic hearing phenotypes in EVA patients. The systematic literature search of the PubMed, Wiley Online Library, EMBASE, Web of Science, and Science Direct databases was conducted in English for articles published before July 15, 2015. Two investigators independently reviewed retrieved literature and evaluated eligibility. Discrepancy was resolved by discussion and a third investigator. Quality of included studies was evaluated using Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment Scale. Data were synthesized using random-effect or fixed-effect models. The effect sizes were estimated by measuring odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence interval (CI). Twenty-five eligible studies involved 2294 cases with EVA data. A total of 272 SLC26A4 variations were found in deafness with EVA and 26 mutations of SCL26A4 had higher frequency. The overall OR was 646.71 (95% CI: 383.30-1091.15, P = 0.000). A total of 22 mutants were considered statistically significant in all ethnicities (ORs >1, P < 0.05). In particular, 8 mutants were specificity of EVA phenotypes in mutations of SLC26A4 for Asia deafness populations (ORs >1, P < 0.05), 4 mutants for Europe and North America (ORs >1, P < 0.05), and the IVS7-2A>G mutations in SLC26A4 were found to have the highest frequency in deafness individuals with EVA phenotype (62.42%). Moreover, subgroups for studies limited to cases with EVA phenotype, 11 mutants relevant risks (RRs) were P < 0.05, especially for IVS7-2A>G bi-allelic mutants assayed in a deafness population (RR = 0.880, P = 0.000). Diagnostic accuracy of SLC26A4 mutation results also identified the significant association of IVS7-2A>G (AUC = 0.99, 95% CI: 0.97-0.99) and p.H723R (AUC = 0.99, 95% CI: 0.98-1.00) detecting deafness with EVA. To conclude, the IVS7-2A>G and H723R in SLC26A4 present a significant predicting value and discriminatory ability for clinical use on diagnosis of EVA within a deafness population.",4
"Mutation spectrum in a large cohort of unrelated consecutive patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adult Aged Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Chromosome Mapping Cohort Studies Female Gene Components Genetic Testing Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Sarcomeres Sequence Analysis, DNA Troponin || Defects in nine sarcomeric protein genes are known to cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Mutation types and frequencies in large cohorts of consecutive and unrelated patients have not yet been determined. We, therefore, screened HCM patients for mutations in six sarcomeric genes: myosin-binding protein C3 (MYBPC3), MYH7, cardiac troponin T (TNNT2), alpha-tropomyosin (TPM1), cardiac troponin I (TNNI3), and cardiac troponin C (TNNC1). HCM was diagnosed in 108 consecutive patients by echocardiography (septum >15 mm, septal/posterior wall >1.3 mm), angiography, or based on a state after myectomy. Single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis was used for mutation screening, followed by DNA-sequencing. A total of 34 different mutations were identified in 108 patients: 18 mutations in MYBPC3 in 20 patients [intervening sequence (intron) 7 + 1G > A and Q1233X were found twice], 13 missense mutations in MYH7 in 14 patients (R807H was found twice), and one amino acid change in TPM1, TNNT2, and TNNI3, respectively. No disease-causing mutation was found in TNNC1. Cosegregation with the HCM phenotype could be demonstrated for 13 mutations (eight mutations in MYBPC3 and five mutations in MYH7). Twenty-eight of the 37 mutation carriers (76%) reported a positive family history with at least one affected first-grade relative; only eight mutations occurred sporadically (22%). MYBPC3 was the gene that most frequently caused HCM in our population. Systematic mutation screening in large samples of HCM patients leads to a genetic diagnosis in about 30% of unrelated index patients and in about 57% of patients with a positive family history.",2 4
"Incretin effect of glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist is preserved in presence of ABCC8/SUR1 mutation in β-cell. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Adult Diabetes Mellitus Exenatide Female Glucagon-Like Peptide 1 Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Receptor Glucose Tolerance Test Humans Incretins Insulin-Secreting Cells Male Middle Aged Mutation Peptides Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Receptors, Drug Receptors, Glucagon Sulfonylurea Receptors Venoms || ",4
"Characterization of a phenotype-based genetic test prediction score for unrelated patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adult Age Factors Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Echocardiography Female Genetic Association Studies Genetic Markers Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Multivariate Analysis Mutation Myofibrils Phenotype Predictive Value of Tests ROC Curve Sarcomeres || To determine the prevalence and spectrum of mutations and genotype-phenotype relationships in the largest hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) cohort to date and to provide an easy, clinically applicable phenotype-derived score that provides a pretest probability for a positive HCM genetic test result. Between April 1, 1997, and February 1, 2007, 1053 unrelated patients with the clinical diagnosis of HCM (60% male; mean ± SD age at diagnosis, 44.4 ± 19 years) had HCM genetic testing for the 9 HCM-associated myofilament genes. Phenotyping was performed by review of electronic medical records. Overall, 359 patients (34%) were genotype positive for a putative HCM-associated mutation in 1 or more HCM-associated genes. Univariate and multivariate analyses identified the echocardiographic reverse curve morphological subtype, an age at diagnosis younger than 45 years, a maximum left ventricular wall thickness of 20 mm or greater, a family history of HCM, and a family history of sudden cardiac death as positive predictors of positive genetic test results, whereas hypertension was a negative predictor. A score, based on the number of predictors of a positive genetic test result, predicted a positive genetic test result ranging from 6% when only hypertension was present to 80% when all 5 positive predictor markers were present. In this largest HCM cohort published to date, the overall yield of genetic testing was 34%. Although all the patients were diagnosed clinically as having HCM, the presence or absence of 6 simple clinical/echocardiographic markers predicted the likelihood of mutation-positive HCM. Phenotype-guided genetic testing using the Mayo HCM Genotype Predictor score provides an easy tool for an effective genetic counseling session.",4
"Molecular genetic analysis of familial hypercholesterolemia: spectrum and regional difference of LDL receptor gene mutations in Japanese population. || Adult DNA Mutational Analysis Female Heterozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Japan Lipids Male Middle Aged Mutation Polymorphism, Genetic Receptors, LDL || To determine the molecular basis of familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) in Japan, 200 unrelated patients with clinically diagnosed heterozygous FH were screened for mutations in coding and promoter region of the low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene using denaturing gradient-gel electrophoresis (DGGE), DNA sequencing and Southern blotting analysis. About 37 different mutations in the LDL receptor gene were identified in 125 (62.5%) of the patients, 22 of these mutations have not been described before. The most common mutations were K790X (19.5%), P664L (6.0%), FH-Tonami-1 (6.0%), IVS15-3C>A (5.5%) and FH-Tonami-2 (4.5%), whereas the other mutations were rare. No apolipoprotein B (apoB) mutations responsible for familial ligand-defective apoB-100 (FDB) were identified. Polymorphisms of apolipoprotein E (apoE) and scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI) were observed to have minor effects on the lipid and lipoprotein profile. In 75 (32.5%) of the FH patients, LDL receptor gene mutations could not be identified. These patients had significantly lower total cholesterol (7.71+/-1.64 vs. 8.68+/-1.47 mmol/l, P<0.001) and LDL-cholesterol (6.02+/-1.51 vs. 6.87+/-1.47 mmol/l, P<0.001) in plasma, also a lower incidence of coronary heart disease (CHD) (22 vs. 29%, P=0.05) compared with patients with a LDL receptor gene mutation, suggesting that besides LDL receptor, defect of other genes involved in LDL metabolism may be a cause of FH with a milder phenotypic expression in Japanese population.",4
"Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Microsatellite haplotyping and identification of a hot spot for mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Amino Acid Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Cause of Death Child Chromosome Mapping Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 DNA, Satellite Exons Female Genetic Linkage Genetic Markers Haplotypes Humans Lod Score Male Middle Aged Myosins Nucleic Acid Heteroduplexes Pedigree Point Mutation Recombination, Genetic Repetitive Sequences, Nucleic Acid || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease. The first identified disease gene, located on chromosome 14q11-q12, encodes the beta-myosin heavy chain. We have performed linkage analysis of two French FHC pedigrees, 720 and 730, with two microsatellite markers located in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene (MYO I and MYO II) and with four highly informative markers, recently mapped to chromosome 14q11-q12. Significant linkage was found with MYO I and MYO II in pedigree 720, but results were not conclusive for pedigree 730. Haplotype analysis of the six markers allowed identification of affected individuals and of some unaffected subjects carrying the disease gene. Two novel missense mutations were identified in exon 13 by direct sequencing, 403Arg-->Leu and 403Arg-->Trp in families 720 and 730, respectively. The 403Arg-->Leu mutation was associated with incomplete penetrance, a high incidence of sudden deaths and severe cardiac events, whereas the consequences of the 403Arg-->Trp mutation appeared less severe. Haplotyping of polymorphic markers in close linkage to the beta-myosin heavy chain gene can, thus, provide rapid analysis of non informative pedigrees and rapid detection of carrier status. Our results also indicate that codon 403 of the beta-myosin heavy chain gene is a hot spot for mutations causing FHC.",2 4
"Surgical Findings and Outcomes in Premenopausal Breast Cancer Patients Undergoing Oophorectomy: A Multicenter Review From the Society of Gynecologic Surgeons Fellows Pelvic Research Network. ||  || To describe the procedures performed, intra-abdominal findings, and surgical pathology in a cohort of women with premenopausal breast cancer who underwent oopherectomy. Multicenter retrospective chart review (Canadian Task Force classification II-3). Nine US academic medical centers participating in the Fellows' Pelvic Research Network (FPRN). One hundred twenty-seven women with premenopausal breast cancer undergoing oophorectomy between January 2013 and March 2016. Surgical castration. The mean patient age was 45.8 years. Fourteen patients (11%) carried a BRCA mutations, and 22 (17%) carried another germline or acquired mutation, including multiple variants of uncertain significance. There was wide variation in surgical approach. Sixty-five patients (51%) underwent pelvic washings, and 43 (35%) underwent concurrent hysterectomy. Other concomitant procedures included midurethral sling placement, appendectomy, and hysteroscopy. Three patients experienced complications (transfusion, wound cellulitis, and vaginal cuff dehiscence). Thirteen patients (10%) had ovarian pathology detected on analysis of the surgical specimen, including metastatic tumor, serous cystadenomas, endometriomas, and Brenner tumor. Eight patients (6%) had Fallopian tube pathology, including 3 serous tubal intraepithelial cancers. Among the 44 uterine specimens, 1 endometrial adenocarcinoma and 1 multifocal endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia were noted. Regarding the entire study population, the number of patients meeting our study criteria and seen by gynecologic surgeons in the FPRN for oophorectomy increased by nearly 400% from 2013 to 2015. Since publication of the Suppression of Ovarian Function Trial data, bilateral oophorectomy has been recommended for some women with premenopausal breast cancer to facilitate breast cancer treatment with aromatase inhibitors. These women may be at elevated risk for occult abdominal pathology compared with the general population. Gynecologic surgeons often perform castration oophorectomy in patients with breast cancer as an increasing number of oncologists are using aromatase inhibitors to treat premenopausal breast cancer. Our data suggest that other abdominal/pelvic cancers, precancerous conditions, and previously unrecognized metastatic disease are not uncommon findings in this patient population. Gynecologists serving this patient population may consider a careful abdominal survey, pelvic washings, endometrial sampling, and serial sectioning of fallopian tube specimens for a thorough evaluation.",4
"Genetics of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in Norway. || Adult Aged Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Female Genetic Testing High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Norway Pedigree Sarcomeres || Genetic testing for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) became available in Norway in 2003. Here, we describe the results of this testing in probands with HCM referred until the end of 2012. The translated exons of MYBPC3, MYH7, TNNI3, TNNT2, MYL2 and MYL3 were analyzed in two groups of probands. In Group 1, comprising 696 probands above 1 year of age, a mutation was found in 203 patients (29.2%). Of those, 5.9% were carriers of two mutations. Mean age in double mutation carriers, single mutation carriers and mutation negative probands was 44 years (± 19 years), 50 years (± 5 years) and 55 years (± 6 years), respectively. In Group 2, comprising 26 infants below the age of 1, a mutation was found in 15.4%. A total of 120 different mutations were found of which 51 (42.5%) were novel.",4
"Comparison of echocardiographic and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy sarcomere mutation carriers without left ventricular hypertrophy. || Adolescent Adult Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Echocardiography Female Follow-Up Studies Heart Heterozygote Humans Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Cine Male Mutation Radiography Sarcomeres Young Adult || Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) typically manifests during or after adolescence in sarcomere mutation carriers at risk for developing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Guidelines recommend serial imaging of mutation carriers without LVH (G+/LVH-) to monitor for phenotypic evolution, but the optimal strategy is undefined. Compared with echocardiography (echo), cardiac MRI (CMR) offers improved endocardial visualization and potential to assess scar. However, the incremental advantage offered by CMR for early diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is unclear. Therefore, we systematically compared echo and CMR in G+/LVH- subjects. A total of 40 sarcomere mutation carriers with normal echo wall thickness (<12 mm or z score <2.5 in children) underwent concurrent CMR. Mean age was 21.7±11.1 years, 55% were female. If left ventricular wall thickness seemed nonuniform, the size and location of relatively thickened segments were noted. Late gadolinium enhancement was assessed with CMR. Diagnostic agreement between echo and CMR was good (90%), although CMR measurements of left ventricular wall thickness were ≈19% lower than echo. Four subjects had mild hypertrophy (12.6-14 mm; ≤2 segments) appreciated by CMR but not echo. No subjects had late gadolinium enhancement. During median 35-month follow-up, 2 subjects developed overt hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, including 1 with mild LVH by CMR at baseline. Echo is unlikely to miss substantial LVH; however, CMR identified mild hypertrophy in ≈10% of mutation carriers with normal echo wall thickness. CMR may be a useful adjunct in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy family screening, particularly in higher risk situations, or if echocardiographic images are suboptimal or suggest borderline LVH.",4
"Targeted screening for the detection of Pompe disease in patients with unclassified limb-girdle muscular dystrophy or asymptomatic hyperCKemia using dried blood: A Spanish cohort. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Creatine Kinase Delayed Diagnosis Dried Blood Spot Testing Female Genetic Testing Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Metabolic Diseases Middle Aged Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle Mutation Prospective Studies Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || We aimed to screen for Pompe disease in patients with unclassified limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) or asymptomatic hyperCKemia using dried blood spot (DBS) assays. Subsequently, we aimed to calculate the diagnostic delay between initial symptom presentation and the diagnosis. A prospective, multicenter, observational study was conducted in 348 patients: 146 with unclassified LGMD and 202 with asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic hyperCKemia. We quantified levels of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) from dried blood spots analyzed fluorometrically. The test was positive in 20 patients, and Pompe disease was confirmed by genetic testing in 16. Undiagnosed Pompe disease was detected in 7.5% of patients with LGMD and in 2.5% of patients with persistent, idiopathic elevation of serum creatine kinase. The c.-32-13 T > G mutation was found most commonly. The diagnostic delay was 15 years on average. In conclusion, DBS tests are useful and reliable screening tools for Pompe disease. We recommend the dried blood spot test to be included in the diagnostic work-up of patients with unclassified myopathies with proximal weakness and/or hyperCKemia of unknown cause and, when positive, to define the diagnosis, it will have to be confirmed by biochemical and/or molecular genetic analysis.",1 4
"Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in pompe disease is not limited to the classic infantile-onset phenotype. ||  || Pompe disease is a genetic disorder caused by a deficiency of acid α-glucosidase (GAA). Patients with classic infantile-onset Pompe disease usually present with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and die before 1 year of age, if not treated with enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). In comparison, patients with late-onset Pompe disease typically do not have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. However, here we describe five patients who presented with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy but did not fit the criteria of classic infantile-onset Pompe disease. Their ages at diagnosis of cardiomyopathy were 1 month in two patients following detection of an audible cardiac murmur and 2-3 years in the three remaining patients. All patients survived for 5-8 years without ERT. Three patients died before the advent of ERT from causes other than congestive heart failure. One patient had a good response to ERT starting at 5 years of age. The sibling of one patient, who did not receive ERT and died at age seven, was diagnosed prenatally. At 3 months of age, the sibling had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and a muscle biopsy at that time revealed glycogen accumulation.This case series demonstrates that Pompe disease is a continuum of disease, and the development of cardiomyopathy is not limited to classic infantile-onset Pompe disease. These patients do not fit into the discrete phenotypes of infantile- or late-onset Pompe disease, which may suggest reconsidering the nomenclature of Pompe disease.",1 4
"Newborn screening for Fabry disease in Taiwan reveals a high incidence of the later-onset GLA mutation c.936+919G>A (IVS4+919G>A). ||  || Fabry disease (alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A, GLA) deficiency) is a panethnic inborn error of glycosphingolipid metabolism. Because optimal therapeutic outcomes depend on early intervention, a pilot program was designed to assess newborn screening for this disease in 171,977 consecutive Taiwanese newborns by measuring their dry blood spot (DBS) alpha-Gal A activities and beta-galactosidase/alpha-Gal A ratios. Of the 90,288 male screenees, 638 (0.7%) had DBS alpha-Gal A activity <30% of normal mean and/or activity ratios >10. A second DBS assay reduced these to 91 (0.1%). Of these, 11 (including twins) had <5% (Group-A), 64 had 5-30% (Group-B), and 11 had >30% (Group-C) of mean normal leukocyte alpha-Gal A activity. All 11 Group-A, 61 Group-B, and 1 Group-C males had GLA gene mutations. Surprisingly, 86% had the later-onset cryptic splice mutation c.936+919G>A (also called IVS4+919G>A). In contrast, screening 81,689 females detected two heterozygotes. The novel mutations were expressed in vitro, predicting their classical or later-onset phenotypes. Newborn screening identified a surprisingly high frequency of Taiwanese males with Fabry disease (approximately 1 in 1,250), 86% having the IVS4+919G>A mutation previously found in later-onset cardiac phenotype patients. Further studies of the IVS4 later-onset phenotype will determine its natural history and optimal timing for therapeutic intervention.",3 4 0
"Targeted next-generation sequencing for the molecular genetic diagnostics of cardiomyopathies. || Adult Base Sequence Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Dilated Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Child Codon, Nonsense Female Frameshift Mutation Gene Deletion Genetic Heterogeneity Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Myosin Heavy Chains Point Mutation Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Sequence Analysis, DNA || Today, mutations in more than 30 different genes have been found to cause inherited cardiomyopathies, some associated with very poor prognosis. However, because of the genetic heterogeneity and limitations in throughput and scalability of current diagnostic tools up until now, it is hardly possible to genetically characterize patients with cardiomyopathy in a fast, comprehensive, and cost-efficient manner. We established an array-based subgenomic enrichment followed by next-generation sequencing to detect mutations in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). With this approach, we show that the genomic region of interest can be enriched by a mean factor of 2169 compared with the coverage of the whole genome, resulting in high sequence coverage of selected disease genes and allowing us to define the genetic pathogenesis of cardiomyopathies in a single sequencing run. In 6 patients, we detected disease-causing mutations, 2 microdeletions, and 4 point mutations. Furthermore, we identified several novel nonsynonymous variants, which are predicted to be harmful, and hence, might be potential disease mutations or modifiers for DCM or HCM. The approach presented here allows for the first time a comprehensive genetic screening in patients with hereditary DCM or HCM in a fast and cost-efficient manner.",4
"Desmosomal gene analysis in arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy: spectrum of mutations and clinical impact in practice. || Adult Arrhythmias, Cardiac Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia DNA Mutational Analysis Desmocollins Desmoglein 2 Desmoplakins Desmosomes Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Plakophilins Prognosis Young Adult gamma Catenin || Five desmosomal genes have been recently implicated in arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy (ARVD/C) but the clinical impact of genetics remains poorly understood. We wanted to address the potential impact of genotyping. Direct sequencing of the five genes (JUP, DSP, PKP2, DSG2, and DSC2) was performed in 135 unrelated patients with ARVD/C. We identified 41 different disease-causing mutations, including 28 novel ones, in 62 patients (46%). In addition, a genetic variant of unknown significance was identified in nine additional patients (7%). Distribution of genes was 31% (PKP2), 10% (DSG2), 4.5% (DSP), 1.5% (DSC2), and 0% (JUP). The presence of desmosomal mutations was not associated with familial context but was associated with young age, symptoms, electrical substrate, and extensive structural damage. When compared with other genes, DSG2 mutations were associated with more frequent left ventricular involvement (P = 0.006). Finally, complex genetic status with multiple mutations was identified in 4% of patients and was associated with more frequent sudden death (P = 0.047). This study supports the use of genetic testing as a new diagnostic tool in ARVC/D and also suggests a prognostic impact, as the severity of the disease appears different according to the underlying gene or the presence of multiple mutations.",4
"In vitro analyses of known and novel RUNX1/AML1 mutations in dominant familial platelet disorder with predisposition to acute myelogenous leukemia: implications for mechanisms of pathogenesis. || Blood Platelet Disorders Chromosomes, Human, Pair 21 Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA Mutational Analysis DNA-Binding Proteins Family Health Female Genes, Dominant Genetic Linkage Genetic Predisposition to Disease Haplotypes Humans Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute Male Pedigree Point Mutation Protein Binding Proto-Oncogene Proteins Transcription Factor AP-2 Transcription Factors Transcriptional Activation || Familial platelet disorder with predisposition to acute myelogenous leukemia (FPD/AML) is an autosomal dominant familial platelet disorder characterized by thrombocytopenia and a propensity to develop AML. Mutation analyses of RUNX1 in 3 families with FPD/AML showing linkage to chromosome 21q22.1 revealed 3 novel heterozygous point mutations (K83E, R135fsX177 (IVS4 + 3delA), and Y260X). Functional investigations of the 7 FPD/AML RUNX1 Runt domain point mutations described to date (2 frameshift, 2 nonsense, and 3 missense mutations) were performed. Consistent with the position of the mutations in the Runt domain at the RUNX1-DNA interface, DNA binding of all mutant RUNX1 proteins was absent or significantly decreased. In general, missense and nonsense RUNX1 proteins retained the ability to heterodimerize with PEBP2beta/CBFbeta and inhibited transactivation of a reporter gene by wild-type RUNX1. Colocalization of mutant RUNX1 and PEBP2beta/CBFbeta in the cytoplasm was observed. These results suggest that the sequestration of PEBP2beta/CBFbeta by mutant RUNX1 may cause the inhibitory effects. While haploinsufficiency of RUNX1 causes FPD/AML in some families (deletions and frameshifts), mutant RUNX1 proteins (missense and nonsense) may also inhibit wild-type RUNX1, possibly creating a higher propensity to develop leukemia. This is consistent with the hypothesis that a second mutation has to occur, either in RUNX1 or another gene, to cause leukemia among individuals harboring RUNX1 FPD/AML mutations and that the propensity to acquire these additional mutations is determined, at least partially, by the initial RUNX1 mutation.",2 4 0
"RHBDF2 mutations are associated with tylosis, a familial esophageal cancer syndrome. || Amino Acid Sequence Carcinoma, Squamous Cell Cell Growth Processes Cell Movement Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17 ErbB Receptors Esophageal Neoplasms Exons Humans Keratinocytes Keratoderma, Palmoplantar, Diffuse Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense Pedigree Phenotype Sequence Alignment Serine Proteases Untranslated Regions || Tylosis esophageal cancer (TOC) is an autosomal-dominant syndrome characterized by palmoplantar keratoderma, oral precursor lesions, and a high lifetime risk of esophageal cancer. We have previously localized the TOC locus to a small genomic interval within chromosomal region 17q25. Using a targeted capture array and next-generation sequencing, we have now identified missense mutations (c.557T>C [p.Ile186Thr] and c.566C>T [p.Pro189Leu] in RHBDF2, which encodes the inactive rhomboid protease RHBDF2 (also known as iRhom2), as the underlying cause of TOC. We show that the distribution of RHBDF2 in tylotic skin is altered in comparison with that in normal skin, and immortalized tylotic keratinocytes have decreased levels of total epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and display an increased proliferative and migratory potential relative to normal cells, even when normal cells are stimulated with exogenous epidermal growth factor. It would thus appear that EGFR signaling is dysregulated in tylotic cells. Furthermore, we also show an altered localization of RHBDF2 in both tylotic and sporadic squamous esophageal tumors. The elucidation of a role of RHBDF2 in growth-factor signaling in esophageal cancer will help to determine whether targeting this pathway in chemotherapy for this and other squamous cell carcinomas will be effective.",2 4
"Polygenic Versus Monogenic Causes of Hypercholesterolemia Ascertained Clinically. || Adult Aged Biomarkers Cholesterol, LDL DNA Copy Number Variations DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Dosage Genetic Markers Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Heredity Heterozygote High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Multifactorial Inheritance Mutation Ontario Phenotype Predictive Value of Tests Risk Factors Severity of Illness Index || Next-generation sequencing technology is transforming our understanding of heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, including revision of prevalence estimates and attribution of polygenic effects. Here, we examined the contributions of monogenic and polygenic factors in patients with severe hypercholesterolemia referred to a specialty clinic. We applied targeted next-generation sequencing with custom annotation, coupled with evaluation of large-scale copy number variation and polygenic scores for raised low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in a cohort of 313 individuals with severe hypercholesterolemia, defined as low-density lipoprotein cholesterol >5.0 mmol/L (>194 mg/dL). We found that (1) monogenic familial hypercholesterolemia-causing mutations detected by targeted next-generation sequencing were present in 47.3% of individuals; (2) the percentage of individuals with monogenic mutations increased to 53.7% when copy number variations were included; (3) the percentage further increased to 67.1% when individuals with extreme polygenic scores were included; and (4) the percentage of individuals with an identified genetic component increased from 57.0% to 92.0% as low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level increased from 5.0 to >8.0 mmol/L (194 to >310 mg/dL). In a clinically ascertained sample with severe hypercholesterolemia, we found that most patients had a discrete genetic basis detected using a comprehensive screening approach that includes targeted next-generation sequencing, an assay for copy number variations, and polygenic trait scores.",4
"Spectrum of mutations in monogenic diabetes genes identified from high-throughput DNA sequencing of 6888 individuals. || Adult Case-Control Studies Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Mutation Mutation, Missense Phenotype Prognosis Sequence Analysis, DNA || Diagnosis of monogenic as well as atypical forms of diabetes mellitus has important clinical implications for their specific diagnosis, prognosis, and targeted treatment. Single gene mutations that affect beta-cell function represent 1-2% of all cases of diabetes. However, phenotypic heterogeneity and lack of family history of diabetes can limit the diagnosis of monogenic forms of diabetes. Next-generation sequencing technologies provide an excellent opportunity to screen large numbers of individuals with a diagnosis of diabetes for mutations in disease-associated genes. We utilized a targeted sequencing approach using the Illumina HiSeq to perform a case-control sequencing study of 22 monogenic diabetes genes in 4016 individuals with type 2 diabetes (including 1346 individuals diagnosed before the age of 40 years) and 2872 controls. We analyzed protein-coding variants identified from the sequence data and compared the frequencies of pathogenic variants (protein-truncating variants and missense variants) between the cases and controls. A total of 40 individuals with diabetes (1.8% of early onset sub-group and 0.6% of adult onset sub-group) were carriers of known pathogenic missense variants in the GCK, HNF1A, HNF4A, ABCC8, and INS genes. In addition, heterozygous protein truncating mutations were detected in the GCK, HNF1A, and HNF1B genes in seven individuals with diabetes. Rare missense mutations in the GCK gene were significantly over-represented in individuals with diabetes (0.5% carrier frequency) compared to controls (0.035%). One individual with early onset diabetes was homozygous for a rare pathogenic missense variant in the WFS1 gene but did not have the additional phenotypes associated with Wolfram syndrome. Targeted sequencing of genes linked with monogenic diabetes can identify disease-relevant mutations in individuals diagnosed with type 2 diabetes not suspected of having monogenic forms of the disease. Our data suggests that GCK-MODY frequently masquerades as classical type 2 diabetes. The results confirm that MODY is under-diagnosed, particularly in individuals presenting with early onset diabetes and clinically labeled as type 2 diabetes; thus, sequencing of all monogenic diabetes genes should be routinely considered in such individuals. Genetic information can provide a specific diagnosis, inform disease prognosis and may help to better stratify treatment plans.",4
"CDH1 mutations in gastric cancer patients from northern Brazil identified by Next- Generation Sequencing (NGS). ||  || Gastric cancer is considered to be the fifth highest incident tumor worldwide and the third leading cause of cancer deaths. Developing regions report a higher number of sporadic cases, but there are only a few local studies related to hereditary cases of gastric cancer in Brazil to confirm this fact. CDH1 germline mutations have been described both in familial and sporadic cases, but there is only one recent molecular description of individuals from Brazil. In this study we performed Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) to assess CDH1 germline mutations in individuals who match the clinical criteria for Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer (HDGC), or who exhibit very early diagnosis of gastric cancer. Among five probands we detected CDH1 germline mutations in two cases (40%). The mutation c.1023T > G was found in a HDGC family and the mutation c.1849G > A, which is nearly exclusive to African populations, was found in an early-onset case of gastric adenocarcinoma. The mutations described highlight the existence of gastric cancer cases caused by CDH1 germline mutations in northern Brazil, although such information is frequently ignored due to the existence of a large number of environmental factors locally. Our report represent the first CDH1 mutations in HDGC described from Brazil by an NGS platform.",4
"Germline mutations of the E-cadherin(CDH1) and TP53 genes, rather than of RUNX3 and HPP1, contribute to genetic predisposition in German gastric cancer patients. || Animals CHO Cells Cadherins Core Binding Factor Alpha 3 Subunit Cricetinae Cricetulus DNA DNA Mutational Analysis DNA-Binding Proteins Family Health Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Immunohistochemistry Male Membrane Proteins Neoplasm Proteins Pedigree Stomach Neoplasms Transcription Factors Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || ",4 0
"Germline CDH1 mutations in bilateral lobular carcinoma in situ. || Antigens, CD Base Sequence Breast Neoplasms Cadherins Carcinoma in Situ Carcinoma, Lobular Female Germ-Line Mutation Humans Middle Aged Sequence Analysis, DNA || Invasive lobular breast cancer (ILC) and lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) are characterised by loss of E-cadherin expression. However germline CDH1 mutations are rare in cases of ILC with no family history of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) and have not been described in women with LCIS. We screened the CDH1 gene in 50 cases of bilateral LCIS/ILC using Sanger sequencing and MLPA. Sanger sequencing revealed four pathogenic germline mutations, including a novel splicing mutation (c.48+1G>A). The remaining three (c.1465insC, c.1942G>T, c.2398delC) have been previously described. All four cases had bilateral LCIS +/- ILC and no family history of gastric cancer. CDH1 germline mutations have not been previously described in women with LCIS. We have shown that germline CDH1 mutations are associated with early onset of bilateral LCIS with or without ILC in women without a family history of gastric cancer. CDH1 mutation screening should be considered in women with early onset of bilateral LCIS/ILC with no family history of HDGC.",3 4
"Prognostic implications of novel beta cardiac myosin heavy chain gene mutations that cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 DNA Primers Female Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Myocardium Myosins Pedigree Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Prognosis Sequence Deletion Survival Analysis Survival Rate || Three novel beta cardiac myosin heavy chain (MHC) gene missense mutations, Phe513Cys, Gly716Arg, and Arg719Trp, which cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) are described. One mutation in exon 15 (Phe513Cys) does not alter the charge of the encoded amino acid, and affected family members have a near normal life expectancy. The Gly716Arg mutation (exon 19; charge change of +1) causes FHC in three family members, one of whom underwent transplantation for heart failure. The Arg719Trp mutation (exon 19; charge change of -1) was found in four unrelated FHC families with a high incidence of premature death and an average life expectancy in affected individuals of 38 yr. A comparable high frequency of disease-related deaths in four families with the Arg719Trp mutation suggests that this specific gene defect directly accounts for the observed malignant phenotype. Further, the significantly different life expectancies associated with the Arg719Trp vs. Phe513Cys mutation (P < 0.001) support the hypothesis that mutations which alter the charge of the encoded amino acid affect survival more significantly than those that produce a conservative amino acid change.",2 4
"Common mutations of familial hypercholesterolemia patients in Taiwan: characteristics and implications of migrations from southeast China. || Adolescent Adult Aged Apolipoproteins B Base Sequence Child China DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Emigration and Immigration Female Haplotypes Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Receptors, LDL Taiwan Young Adult || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disease caused by mutations in low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), apolipoprotein B-100 (APOB), and proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) genes. This study investigated FH patients carrying common mutations in Taiwan and compared them to FH southeastern Asians. Causal FH mutations were identified by exon-by-exon sequencing with/without multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification among 208 Taiwanese with clinically diagnosed FH. Haplotype analyses among probands and family members were undertaken using TaqMan® Assays. Totally, LDLR mutations were found in 118 probands, consisting of 61 different loci, and APOB 10579C>T mutations in 12 probands. Three mutations (64delG, 1661C>T, and 2099A>G) were novel. LDLR 986G>A (13.1%), 1747C>T (10.8%), and APOB 10579C>T (9.2%) were common mutations with no differences in phenotypes. LDLR 1747C>T associated with one haplotype (CAAGCCCCATGG/(dTA)n-112nt); LDLR 986G>A with two. APOB 10579C>T associated with the same LDLR binding-domain pattern in Taiwanese and southeastern Asians. We concluded that LDLR 986G>A, 1747C>T and APOB 10579C>T are common mutations, with combined frequency of approximately 33%. The presence of different haplotypes associated with FH common mutations in Taiwan indicates multiple historical migrations, probable multiple recurrent origins from southern China, and haplotype homologies reflect the presence of common ancestors in southern China.",4
"Comparative study of endoscopic surveillance in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer according to CDH1 mutation status. || Adult Antigens, CD Biopsy Cadherins Carcinoma, Signet Ring Cell Early Detection of Cancer Female Gastric Mucosa Gastroscopy Germ-Line Mutation Humans Longitudinal Studies Male Middle Aged Population Surveillance Prospective Studies Quality of Life Stomach Neoplasms Time Factors || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) accounts for 1% of gastric cancer cases. For patients with a germline CDH1 mutation, risk-reducing gastrectomy is recommended. However, for those delaying surgery or for families with no causative mutation identified, regular endoscopy is advised. This study aimed to determine the yield of signet ring cell carcinoma (SRCC) foci in individuals with a CDH1 pathogenic variant compared with those without and how this varies with successive endoscopies. Patients fulfilling HDGC criteria were recruited to a prospective longitudinal cohort study. Endoscopy was performed according to a strict protocol with visual inspection followed by focal lesion and random biopsy sampling to detect foci of SRCC. Survival analysis determined progression to finding of SRCC according to CDH1 mutation status. The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire Core 30 and 36-item Short Form Health Survey questionnaires assessed quality of life before surveillance and each endoscopy. Eighty-five individuals fulfilling HDGC criteria underwent 201 endoscopies; 54 (63.5%) tested positive for CDH1 mutation. SRCC yield was 61.1% in CDH1 mutation carriers compared with 9.7% in noncarriers, and mutation-positive patients had a 10-fold risk of SRCC on endoscopy compared with those with no mutation detected (P < .0005). Yield of SRCC decreased substantially with subsequent endoscopies. Surveillance was associated with improved psychological health. SRCC foci are prevalent in CDH1 mutation carriers and can be detected at endoscopy using a standardized, multiple biopsy sampling protocol. Decreasing yield over time suggests that the frequency of endoscopy might be reduced. For patients with no CDH1 pathogenic variant detected, the cost-to-benefit ratio needs to be assessed in view of the low yield.",4
"Five new pedigrees with inherited RUNX1 mutations causing familial platelet disorder with propensity to myeloid malignancy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Blood Platelet Disorders Child Contraindications Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA Mutational Analysis Disease Progression Family Female Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation Humans Leukemia, Myeloid Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Young Adult || Familial platelet disorder with propensity to myeloid malignancy (FPD/AML) is an autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by platelet abnormalities and a predisposition to myelodysplasia (MDS) and/or acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The disorder, caused by inherited mutations in RUNX1, is uncommon with only 14 pedigrees reported. We screened 10 families with a history of more than one first degree relative with MDS/AML for inherited mutations in RUNX1. Germ- line RUNX1 mutations were identified in 5 pedigrees with a 3:2 predominance of N-terminal mutations. Several affected members had normal platelet counts or platelet function, features not previously reported in FPD/AML. The median incidence of MDS/AML among carriers of RUNX1 mutation was 35%. Individual treatments varied but included hematopoietic stem cell transplantation from siblings before recognition of the inherited leukemogenic mutation. Transplantation was associated with a high incidence of complications including early relapse, failure of engraftment, and posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorder. Given the small size of modern families and the clinical heterogeneity of this syndrome, the diagnosis of FPD/AML could be easily overlooked and may be more prevalent than previously recognized. Therefore, it would appear prudent to screen young patients with MDS/AML for RUNX1 mutation, before consideration of sibling hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.",2 4
"MAPK activation in mature cataract associated with Noonan syndrome. || Adult Cataract Humans Lens, Crystalline MAP Kinase Signaling System Male Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 1 Noonan Syndrome || Noonan syndrome is an autosomal, dominantly inherited disease; it is physically characterized by short stature, short neck, webbed neck, abnormal auricles, high arched palate, and cardiovascular malformation. Its pathological condition is thought to be due to a gain-of-function mutation in the Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signal transduction pathway. Eyelid abnormalities such as ocular hypertelorism and blepharoptosis are the most commonly observed eye complications. We report a case of Noonan syndrome associated with mature cataract that required operation. A 42-year-old man was diagnosed with Noonan syndrome at the age of 1 year. He underwent an eye examination after complaining of decreased visual acuity in the right eye and was diagnosed with mature cataract, which was treated by cataract surgery. There were no intraoperative complications, and the postoperative course was uneventful. Protein analysis of lens capsule and epithelium at capsulorhexis showed MAPK cascade proteins such as ERK and p38MAPK were upregulated. An abnormality in the PTPN11 gene was also observed; a potential mechanism of cataract onset may be that opacity of the lens rapidly progressed due to abnormal activation of the Ras-MAPK signal transduction pathway. This case highlights the possible association of cataract formation with MAPK cascade protein upregulation in Noonan syndrome.",4
"De novo CDH1 mutation in a family presenting with early-onset diffuse gastric cancer. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Antigens, CD Cadherins Family Female Germ-Line Mutation Hodgkin Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Neoplasms, Multiple Primary Stomach Neoplasms || In this report, we describe the first concluded case of a de novo germline mutation in CDH1 in a hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) kindred. The incident case was a woman with a personal history of Hodgkin's lymphoma and diffuse gastric cancer, who was then confirmed to have a CDH1 mutation (c.1792 C>T (R598X)). The patient's mother was found to have the same CDH1 germline mutation; however, neither maternal grandparent was found to carry the mutation, thus leading to a conclusion that the proband's mother's mutation is of de novo origin. This case highlights the importance of recognition of the HDGC syndrome and of testing for CDH1 germline mutations in young individuals with diffuse gastric cancer without a family history of the disease.",2 4
"Costello syndrome associated with novel germline HRAS mutations: an attenuated phenotype? || Abnormalities, Multiple Base Sequence Child Child, Preschool Cognition DNA Mutational Analysis Developmental Disabilities Facial Asymmetry Female Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Male Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras) Psychological Tests Pyloric Stenosis Syndrome || Costello syndrome is a rare congenital disorder typically characterized by severe failure-to-thrive, cardiac abnormalities including tachyarrhythmia and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, distinctive facial features, a predisposition to papillomata and malignant tumors, neurologic abnormalities, developmental delay, and mental retardation. Its underlying cause is de novo germline mutations in the oncogene HRAS. Almost all Costello syndrome mutations affect one of the glycine residues in position 12 or 13 of the protein product. More than 80% of patients with Costello syndrome share the same underlying mutation, resulting in a G12S amino acid change. We report on two patients with novel HRAS mutations affecting amino acids 58 (T58I) and 146 (A146V), respectively. Despite facial features that appear less coarse than those typically seen in Costello patients, both patients show many of the physical and developmental problems characteristic for Costello syndrome. These novel HRAS mutations may be less common than the frequently reported G12S change, or patients with these changes may be undiagnosed due to their less coarse facial features. In addition to the findings previously known to occur in Costello syndrome, one of our patients had hypertrophic pyloric stenosis. This led us to review the medical histories on a cohort of proven HRAS mutation positive Costello syndrome patients, and we found a statistically significantly (P < 0.001) increased frequency of pyloric stenosis in Costello syndrome (5/58) compared to the general population frequency of 2-3/1,000. Thus we add hypertrophic pyloric stenosis to the abnormalities seen with increased frequency in Costello syndrome.",4
"A Next-Generation Sequencing Approach to Identify Gene Mutations in Early- and Late-Onset Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Patients of an Italian Cohort. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Biomarkers Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Cohort Studies Female Genetic Testing High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Italy Male Middle Aged Mutation || Sequencing of sarcomere protein genes in patients fulfilling the clinical diagnostic criteria for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) identifies a disease-causing mutation in 35% to 60% of cases. Age at diagnosis and family history may increase the yield of mutations screening. In order to assess whether Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) may fulfil the molecular diagnostic needs in HCM, we included 17 HCM-related genes in a sequencing panel run on PGM IonTorrent. We selected 70 HCM patients, 35 with early (≤25 years) and 35 with late (≥65 years) diagnosis of disease onset. All samples had a 98.6% average of target regions, with coverage higher than 20× (mean coverage 620×). We identified 41 different mutations (seven of them novel) in nine genes: MYBPC3 (17/41 = 41%); MYH7 (10/41 = 24%); TNNT2, CAV3 and MYH6 (3/41 = 7.5% each); TNNI3 (2/41 = 5%); GLA, MYL2, and MYL3 (1/41=2.5% each). Mutation detection rate was 30/35 (85.7%) in early-onset and 8/35 (22.9%) in late-onset HCM patients, respectively (p < 0.0001). The overall detection rate for patients with positive family history was 84%, and 90.5% in patients with early disease onset. In our study NGS revealed higher mutations yield in patients with early onset and with a family history of HCM. Appropriate patient selection can increase the yield of genetic testing and make diagnostic testing cost-effective.",4
"Mutation identification of Fabry disease in families with other lysosomal storage disorders. || Adult Aged, 80 and over Fabry Disease Female Fucosidosis Humans Middle Aged Mucopolysaccharidosis I Mutation Pedigree alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) caused by the deficiency of the enzyme α-galactosidase. It exhibits a wide clinical spectrum that may lead to a delayed or even missed diagnosis and the real incidence can be underestimated. We report the cases of two unrelated Italian families in whom FD was incidentally diagnosed in two females. In both families, the risk for other lysosomal disorders was known from other members affected by fucosidosis or mucopolysaccharidosis I Hurler/Scheie. Some subjects were simultaneously heterozygous for Fabry and the other lysosomal deficiency. Our study shows that the risk for more than one LSDs can occur in a family pedigree. The diagnosis of Fabry in female probands represents a diagnostic challenge, as symptoms and signs can be variably present because of the random X-chromosome inactivation.",2 4
"High cumulative risks of cancer in patients with PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome. || Adult Aged Breast Neoplasms Endometrial Neoplasms Female Genetic Association Studies Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Melanoma Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Risk Factors Thyroid Neoplasms || PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome (PHTS) encompasses several clinical syndromes with germline mutations in the PTEN tumour suppressor gene, including Cowden syndrome which is characterised by an increased risk of breast and thyroid cancers. Because PHTS is rare, data regarding cancer risks and genotype-phenotype correlations are limited. The objective of this study was to better define cancer risks in this syndrome with respect to the type and location of PTEN mutations. 154 PHTS individuals with a deleterious germline PTEN mutation were recruited from the activity of the Institut Bergonié genetic laboratory. Detailed phenotypic information was obtained for 146 of them. Age and sex adjusted standardised incidence ratio (SIR) calculations, cumulative cancer risk estimations, and genotype-phenotype analyses were performed. Elevated SIRs were found mainly for female breast cancer (39.1, 95% CI 24.8 to 58.6), thyroid cancer in women (43.2, 95% CI 19.7 to 82.1) and in men (199.5, 95% CI 106.39 to 342.03), melanoma in women (28.3, 95% CI 7.6 to 35.4) and in men (39.4, 95% CI 10.6 to 100.9), and endometrial cancer (48.7, 95% CI 9.8 to 142.3). Cumulative cancer risks at age 70 were 85% (95% CI 70% to 95%) for any cancer, 77% (95% CI 59% to 91%) for female breast cancer, and 38% (95% CI 25% to 56%) for thyroid cancer. The risk of cancer was two times greater in women with PHTS than in men with PHTS (p<0.05). This study shows a considerably high cumulative risk of cancer for patients with PHTS, mainly in women without clear genotype-phenotype correlation for this cancer risk. New recommendations for the management of PHTS patients are proposed.",2 4 3
"Characterization of a recurrent germ line mutation of the E-cadherin gene: implications for genetic testing and clinical management. || Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Blotting, Western Cadherins Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Codon, Nonsense Collagen DNA Mutational Analysis DNA Primers Drug Combinations Exons Germ-Line Mutation Haplotypes Heterozygote Humans Laminin Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Neoplasm Invasiveness Pedigree Plasmids Polymerase Chain Reaction Proteoglycans Risk Sequence Analysis, DNA Stomach Neoplasms || To identify germ line CDH1 mutations in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) families and develop guidelines for management of at risk individuals. We ascertained 31 HDGC previously unreported families, including 10 isolated early-onset diffuse gastric cancer (DGC) cases. Screening for CDH1 germ line mutations was done by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and automated DNA sequencing. We identified eight inactivating and one missense CDH1 germ line mutation. The missense mutation conferred in vitro loss of protein function. Two families had the previously described 1003C>T nonsense mutation. Haplotype analysis revealed this to be a recurrent and not a founder mutation. Thirty-six percent (5 of 14) of the families with a documented DGC diagnosed before the age of 50 and other cases of gastric cancer carried CDH1 germ line mutations. Two of 10 isolated cases of DGC in individuals ages <35 years harbored CDH1 germ line mutations. One mutation positive family was ascertained through a family history of lobular breast cancer (LBC) and another through an individual with both DGC and LBC. Occult DGC was identified in five of six prophylactic gastrectomies done on asymptomatic, endoscopically negative 1003C>T mutation carriers. In addition to families with a strong history of early-onset DGC, CDH1 mutation screening should be offered to isolated cases of DGC in individuals ages <35 years and for families with multiple cases of LBC, with any history of DGC or unspecified GI malignancies. Prophylactic gastrectomy is potentially a lifesaving procedure and clinical breast screening is recommended for asymptomatic mutation carriers.",2 4
"Late-onset Pompe disease in France: molecular features and epidemiology from a nationwide study. ||  || Pompe disease (PD) is caused by a deficiency of lysosomal acid α-glucosidase resulting from mutations in the GAA gene. The clinical spectrum ranges from a rapidly fatal multisystemic disorder (classic PD, onset < 1 year) to a milder adult onset myopathy. The aims of this study were to characterize the GAA mutations, to establish the disease epidemiology, and to identify potential genotype-phenotype correlations in French late-onset PD patients (onset ≥ 2 years) diagnosed since the 1970s. Data were collected from the two main laboratories involved in PD diagnosis and from the French Pompe registry. Two hundred forty-six patients (130 females and 116 males) were included, with a mean age at diagnosis of 43 years. Eighty-three different mutations were identified in the GAA gene, among which 28 were novel. These variants were spread all over the sequence and included 42 missense (one affecting start codon), 8 nonsense, 15 frameshift, 14 splice mutations, 3 small in-frame deletions, and one large deletion. The common c.-32-13T>G mutation was detected in 151/170 index cases. Other frequent mutations included the exon 18 deletion, the c.525del, and the missense mutations c.1927G>A (p.Gly643Arg) and c.655G>A (p.Gly219Arg). Patients carrying the c.-32-13T>G mutation had an older mean age at onset than patients non-exhibiting this mutation (36 versus 25 years). Patients with the same genotype had a highly variable age at onset. We estimated the frequency of late-onset PD in France around 1/69,927 newborns. In conclusion, we characterized the French cohort of late-onset PD patients through a nationwide study covering more than 40 years.",1 4
"Genetic heterogeneity of autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia in Mexico. || Adult Apolipoprotein B-100 Apolipoproteins B Chromosomes, Human, Pair 1 Female Genetic Heterogeneity Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Lod Score Male Mexico Middle Aged Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Quantitative Trait Loci Receptors, LDL Serine Endopeptidases || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) and familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 (FDB) are relatively common lipid disorders caused by mutations of the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and apolipoprotein B (apoB) genes, respectively. A third locus on chromosome 1p34.1-p32 was recently linked to FH and the responsible gene has been identified [protein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9)]. We assessed the contribution of the LDLR, apoB, and PCSK9 genes as cause of FH in Mexico. Forty six unrelated probands, as well as 68 affected and 60 healthy relatives, were included. All index cases were diagnosed as having heterozygous autosomal dominant FH. Seventeen of the 46 index cases had LDLR gene mutations, four of which were novel (Fs92ter108, C268R, Q718X, and Fs736ter743); and only one patient had an apoB mutation (R3500Q). We sequenced the PCSK9 gene in the remainder of the 28 probands with no identified LDLR or APOB gene defects; however, no PCSK9 mutations were found, including one large kindred with positive linkage to the 1p34.1-32 locus (multipoint LOD score of 3.3) and two small pedigrees. Linkage was excluded from these three loci in at least four kindreds suggesting that other yet uncharacterized genes are involved. Our results underline substantial genetic heterogeneity for FH in the Mexican population.",4
"Detection of 11 germline inactivating TP53      mutations and absence of TP63 and HCHK2      mutations in 17 French families with Li-Fraumeni      or Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome. || Checkpoint Kinase 2 DNA Mutational Analysis DNA-Binding Proteins Family Health Female France Genes, Tumor Suppressor Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Membrane Proteins Mutation Pedigree Phosphoproteins Protein Kinases Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Trans-Activators Transcription Factors Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Tumor Suppressor Proteins || ",4
"Prevalence and functional consequence of TP53 mutations in pediatric adrenocortical carcinoma: a children's oncology group study. || Adolescent Adrenal Cortex Neoplasms Adrenocortical Carcinoma Adult Age Factors Alleles Carcinogenesis Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Family Health Female Genes, p53 Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Male Neoplasm Staging Penetrance Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Young Adult || Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a rare pediatric malignancy. It occurs in excess among individuals with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, which results primarily from germline mutations in the TP53 gene. Prior series exploring frequencies of germline TP53 mutation among children with ACC have been small, geographically limited, or subject to referral bias. The functional consequence of mutations has not been related to phenotype. We provide a genotype-phenotype analysis of TP53 mutations in pediatric ACC and propose a model for tissue-specific effects based on adrenocortical ontogeny. Eighty-eight consecutive, unrelated children with ACC, unselected for family history, underwent germline TP53 sequencing. Rate and distribution of mutations were identified. Functional analysis was performed for novel TP53 variants. Correlation with the International Agency for Research on Cancer p53 database further delineated mutational distribution, association with family history, and risk for multiple primary malignancies (MPMs). Germline mutations were present in 50% of children. These mutations did not correspond to the conventional hotspot mutations. There was a wide range of mutant protein function. Patients bearing alleles encoding protein with higher functionality were less likely to have a strong family cancer history, whereas those with greater loss of function had MPMs and/or positive family history. In patients with MPMs, ACC was the most frequent initial malignancy. Finally, we demonstrated age-dependent rates of TP53 mutation positivity. TP53 mutations are prevalent in children with ACC but decline with age. Mutations result in a broad spectrum of functional loss. Effect of individual mutations may predict carrier and familial disease penetrance with potentially broad implications for clinical surveillance and counseling.",3 4 0
"[Hereditary gastric cancer]. || Adult Antigens, CD Cadherins Female Gastrectomy Genes, Dominant Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Mutation, Missense Neoplasm Staging Phenotype Risk Assessment Stomach Neoplasms || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer is an autosomal dominant cancer syndrome with approximately 70%-80% penetrance. The cumulative lifetime risk of clinically detected gastric cancer is 63%-83% for women and 40%-67% for men. The average age at diagnosis is 40 years. Approximately 25%-40% of patients carry a germline mutation of the CDH1 gene. This gene encodes the transmembrane protein E-cadherin which plays a central role in cell adhesion and signal transduction. Classified according to Laurén, patients develop multifocal diffuse signet-ring cell carcinoma and, in late stages, linitis plastica. In the foveolar neck region, the site of gastric stem cells, in situ signet-ring cell carcinoma has been identified as a precursor lesion of invasive cancer. Therein, pagetoid spread of tumour cells below the preserved epithelium within the basal membrane represents the characteristic morphology. PAS staining may facilitate detection of tiny lesions.The present article provides detailed information on this cancer syndrome from the point of view of the pathologist as well as the human geneticist, focussing on the multidisciplinary management of affected patients.",4
"Dominant and recessive inheritance of morbid obesity associated with melanocortin 4 receptor deficiency. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Amino Acid Sequence Body Composition Child Child, Preschool Energy Metabolism Female Genes, Dominant Genes, Recessive Genotype Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Obesity, Morbid Pedigree Phenotype Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Corticotropin Signal Transduction || Over 20 severely obese subjects in 11 independent kindreds have been reported to have pathogenic heterozygous mutations in the gene encoding the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R), making this the most common known monogenic cause of human obesity. To date, the detailed clinical phenotype of this dominantly inherited disorder has not been defined, and no homozygous subjects have been described. We determined the nucleotide sequence of the entire coding region of the MC4R gene in 243 subjects with severe, early-onset obesity. A novel two-base pair GT insertion in codon 279 was found in two unrelated subjects, and four novel missense mutations, N62S, R165Q, V253I, C271Y, and one mutation (T112M) reported previously were found in five subjects. N62S was found in homozygous form in five children with severe obesity from a consanguineous pedigree. All four heterozygous carriers were nonobese. Several features of the phenotype, e.g. hyperphagia, tendency toward tall stature, hyperinsulinemia, and preserved reproductive function, closely resemble those reported previously in Mc4r knock-out mice. In addition, a marked increase in bone mineral density was seen in all affected subjects. In transient transfection assays, the N62S mutant receptor showed a responsiveness to alphaMSH that was intermediate between the wild-type receptor and mutant receptors carrying nonsense and missense mutations associated with dominantly inherited obesity. Thus MC4R mutations result in a syndrome of hyperphagic obesity in humans that can present with either dominant or recessive patterns of inheritance.",4
"Functionality of sequence variants in the genes coding for the low-density lipoprotein receptor and apolipoprotein B in individuals with inherited hypercholesterolemia. ||  || Patients with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) have elevated LDL-C levels, usually above the 90th percentile (P90) for age and gender. However, large-scale genetic cascade screening for FH showed that 15% of the LDL-receptor (LDLR) or Apolipoprotein B (APOB) mutation carriers have LDL-C levels below P75. Nonpathogenicity of sequence changes may explain this phenomenon. To assess pathogenicity of a mutation we proposed three criteria: (1) mean LDL-C 4P75 in untreated mutation carriers; (2) higher mean LDL-C level in untreated carriers than in untreated noncarriers; and (3) higher percentage of medication users in carriers than in noncarriers at screening. We considered a mutation nonpathogenic when none of the three criteria were met. We applied these criteria to mutations that had been determined in more than 50 untreated adults. Segregation analysis was performed to confirm nonpathogenicity. Forty-six mutations had been tested in more than 50 untreated subjects, and three were nonpathogenic according to our criteria: one in LDLR (c.108C4A, exon 2) and two in APOB (c.13154T4C and c.13181T4C, both in exon 29). Segregation analysis also indicated nonpathogenicity. According to our criteria, three sequence variants were nonpathogenic. The criteria may help to identify nonpathogenic sequence changes in genetic cascade screening programs.",4
"A novel mutation Thr162Arg of the melanocortin 4 receptor gene in a Spanish children and adolescent population. || Adolescent Animals COS Cells Case-Control Studies Cell Membrane Cercopithecus aethiops Child Child, Preschool Cyclic AMP Female Genotype Humans Male Mutation Obesity Overweight Pedigree Phenotype Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Spain Transfection || The melanocortin 4 receptor gene (MC4R) is involved in body weight regulation. While many studies associated MC4R mutations with childhood obesity, information on MC4R mutations in Spanish children and adolescents is lacking. Our objective was to screen a population of children and adolescents from the north of Spain (Navarra) for MC4R mutations and to study the phenotypes of carriers and their families. In addition, functional assays were performed for a novel MC4R mutation. The study was composed of 451 Spanish children and adolescents (49% boys), aged 5-18 year. According to the International Obesity Task Force (IOTF) criteria, the groups included 160 obese, 132 overweight and 159 normal-weight control subjects. One novel (Thr162Arg) and three known nonsynonymous mutations in the MC4R gene (Ser30Phe, Thr150Ile, Ala244Glu) were detected heterozygously. The MC4R mutations were found in three male (one obese and two overweight) and two female subjects (one obese and one overweight). The novel mutation did not appear to lead to an impaired receptor function. An unequivocal relationship of MC4R mutations with obesity in pedigrees together with an impaired function of the encoded receptor could not be established for any of the mutations. The presence of heterozygous MC4R mutations in obese and overweight subjects indicates that these mutations may be a susceptibility factor for obesity development, but lifestyle factors, such as exercise or sedentary activities, may modify their effect.",4
"Multicenter Female Fabry Study (MFFS) - clinical survey on current treatment of females with Fabry disease. || Adult Aged Enzyme Replacement Therapy Fabry Disease Female Glycolipids Humans Middle Aged Retrospective Studies Sphingolipids || The aim of the present study was to assess manifestations of and applied treatment concepts for females with Fabry disease (FD) according to the current European Fabry Guidelines. Between 10/2008 and 12/2014, data from the most recent visit of 261 adult female FD patients from six German Fabry centers were retrospectively analyzed. Clinical presentation and laboratory data, including plasma lyso-Gb3 levels were assessed. Fifty-five percent of females were on enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), according to recent European FD guidelines. Thirty-three percent of females were untreated although criteria for ERT initiation were fulfilled. In general, the presence of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) seemed to impact more on ERT initiation than impaired renal function. In ERT-naïve females RAAS blockers were more often prescribed if LVH was present rather than albuminuria. Affected females with missense mutations showed a similar disease burden compared to females with nonsense mutations. Elevated plasma lyso-Gb3 levels in ERT-naïve females seem to be a marker of disease burden, since patients showed comparable incidences of organ manifestations even if they were ~8 years younger than females with normal lyso-Gb3 levels. The treatment of the majority of females with FD in Germany is in line with the current European FD guidelines. However, a relevant number of females remain untreated despite organ involvement, necessitating a careful reevaluation of these females.",3 4
"Right Ventricular Hypertrophy, Systolic Function, and Disease Severity in Anderson-Fabry Disease: An Echocardiographic Study. || Echocardiography Fabry Disease Female Humans Hypertrophy, Right Ventricular Image Interpretation, Computer-Assisted Male Middle Aged Reproducibility of Results Sensitivity and Specificity Stroke Volume Ventricular Dysfunction, Right || Right ventricular (RV) involvement has been described in Anderson-Fabry disease (AFD), especially in patients with established Fabry cardiomyopathy (FC). However, few and controversial data on RV systolic function are available, and there are no specific tissue Doppler studies. Detailed echocardiographic examinations were performed in 45 patients with AFD. FC, defined as maximal left ventricular wall thickness ≥ 15 mm, was present in 12. The Mainz Severity Score Index was calculated for each patient. Pulsed tissue Doppler was applied to the RV free wall at the tricuspid annular level and at the septal and lateral corners at the mitral annular level to obtain systolic tissue Doppler velocities (RV Sa, septal Sa, and lateral Sa, respectively). Twelve patients with amyloid light-chain cardiac amyloidosis were studied as a control group. Echocardiography revealed RV hypertrophy (RVH) in 31% of patients with AFD, all but one of whom were male and all of whom had concomitant left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). All patients with AFD had normal RV fractional area change (47.9 ± 6.5%) and tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (21.7 ± 3.2 mm) and all but one also had normal RV Sa (13.2 ± 2.2 cm/sec). RVH positively correlated with indices of LVH (r = 0.8, P = .0001, for all parameters evaluated), as well as with Mainz Severity Score Index (r = 0.70, P = .0001). Septal and lateral Sa were decreased in almost all patients (means, 7.7 ± 1.8 and 7.9 ± 1.9 cm/sec, respectively), irrespective of the presence of LVH. Compared with control subjects with cardiac amyloidosis, patients with FC showed better indices of RV systolic function (P < .001 for all: tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion, RV fractional area change, and RV Sa) despite similar RV wall thickness (6.2 ± 1.2 vs 6.9 ± 1.9 mm, P = NS). RVH is common in patients with AFD and correlates with disease severity and LVH. RVH, however, does not significantly affect RV systolic function. Patients with FC have better RV systolic function compared with those with cardiac amyloidosis with similar levels of RV thickness. The combination of low LV Sa values and normal RV Sa values might be helpful in the differential diagnosis of infiltrative heart disease.",2 4
"Mutation of Arg723Gly in beta-myosin heavy chain gene in five Chinese families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. ||  || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a form of cardiomyopathy with an autosomal dominant inherited disease, which is caused by mutations in at least one of the sarcomeric protein genes. Mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain (beta-MHC) are the most common cause of HCM. This study was to reveal the disease-causing gene mutations in Chinese population with HCM, and to analyze the correlation between the genotype and phenotype. The exons 3 to 26 of MYH7 were amplified by PCR, and the PCR products were sequenced in five non-kin HCM patients. A 17-year-old patient was detected to be an Arg723Gly mutation carrier. Then his family was gene-screened, and the correlation between genotype and phenotype was analyzed. The mutation of Arg723Gly in a Chinese family with HCM was detected for the first time. With a C-G transversion in nucleotide 13,619 of the MYH7 gene, located at the essential light chain interacting region in S1, the replacement of arginine by glycine took place at amino acid residue 723. A two-dimensional echocardiogram showed moderate asymmetrical septal hypertrophy with left atria enlargement. There was no obstruction in the left ventricular outflow tract. In his family, a total of 13 individuals were diagnosed HCM and 5 of them were dead of congestive heart failure at a mean age of 66-year-old. Eight living members were all detected to carry the mutation, in which 3 developed progressive heart failure. Moreover, the heart function of the people evidently deteriorates when their age are older than 50. The mutation and the disease show co-separated. The Arg723Gly mutation is a malignant type. In Chinese the mutation has the similar characters to the former report but has low degree malignant.",4
"Activating mutations in the ABCC8 gene in neonatal diabetes mellitus. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Birth Weight Developmental Disabilities Diabetes Complications Diabetes Mellitus Female Heterozygote Humans Hypoglycemic Agents Infant, Newborn Insulin-Secreting Cells Male Mutation, Missense Pedigree Potassium Channels Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Receptors, Drug Sulfonylurea Compounds Sulfonylurea Receptors Tolbutamide || The ATP-sensitive potassium (K(ATP)) channel, composed of the beta-cell proteins sulfonylurea receptor (SUR1) and inward-rectifying potassium channel subunit Kir6.2, is a key regulator of insulin release. It is inhibited by the binding of adenine nucleotides to subunit Kir6.2, which closes the channel, and activated by nucleotide binding or hydrolysis on SUR1, which opens the channel. The balance of these opposing actions determines the low open-channel probability, P(O), which controls the excitability of pancreatic beta cells. We hypothesized that activating mutations in ABCC8, which encodes SUR1, cause neonatal diabetes. We screened the 39 exons of ABCC8 in 34 patients with permanent or transient neonatal diabetes of unknown origin. We assayed the electrophysiologic activity of mutant and wild-type K(ATP) channels. We identified seven missense mutations in nine patients. Four mutations were familial and showed vertical transmission with neonatal and adult-onset diabetes; the remaining mutations were not transmitted and not found in more than 300 patients without diabetes or with early-onset diabetes of similar genetic background. Mutant channels in intact cells and in physiologic concentrations of magnesium ATP had a markedly higher P(O) than did wild-type channels. These overactive channels remained sensitive to sulfonylurea, and treatment with sulfonylureas resulted in euglycemia. Dominant mutations in ABCC8 accounted for 12 percent of cases of neonatal diabetes in the study group. Diabetes results from a newly discovered mechanism whereby the basal magnesium-nucleotide-dependent stimulatory action of SUR1 on the Kir pore is elevated and blockade by sulfonylureas is preserved.",2 4
"Ethnic-specific spectrum of GJB2 and SLC26A4 mutations: their origin and a literature review. || Connexin 26 Connexins DNA Mutational Analysis Hearing Loss Humans Membrane Transport Proteins Sulfate Transporters || The mutation spectrum of the GJB2 and SLC26A4 genes, the 2 most common genes causing deafness, are known to be ethnic specific. In this study, the spectrum of the reported GJB2 and SLC26A4 mutations in different populations are reviewed and considered from a human migration perspective. Fifty-two and 17 articles on GJB2 and SLC26A4 mutations, respectively, were reviewed through the PubMed database from April 1996 to September 2014. The 4 most prevalent mutations were selected and compared. A cluster analysis was subsequently performed for these selected mutations. The present review of frequent mutations shows the ethnic-specific GJB2 and SLC26A4 gene mutation spectrum. A cluster analysis of the GJB2 and SLC26A4 genes revealed similarities between ethnic populations. The mutation spectrum reviewed in this study clearly indicated that the frequent mutations in the GJB2 and SLC26A4 genes are consistent with the founder mutation hypothesis. A comparison with the Y-chromosome phylogenetic tree indicated that these mutations may have occurred during human migration.",4
"Molecular basis of autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia: assessment in a large cohort of hypercholesterolemic children. || Adolescent Apolipoproteins B Child Child, Preschool Cholesterol, LDL Cohort Studies Female Genotype Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Mutation Phenotype Receptors, LDL || Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH) is characterized by elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and premature cardiovascular disease. Mutations in the genes encoding for low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), apolipoprotein B (APOB), and proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin 9 (PCSK9) underlie ADH. Nevertheless, a proportion of individuals who exhibit the ADH phenotype do not carry mutations in any of these 3 genes. Estimates of the percentage of such cases among the ADH phenotype vary widely. We therefore investigated a large pediatric population with an unequivocal ADH phenotype to assess the molecular basis of hereditary hypercholesterolemia and to define the percentage of individuals with unexplained dyslipidemia. We enrolled individuals with low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels above the 95th percentile for age and gender and an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern of hypercholesterolemia from a large referred pediatric cohort of 1430 children. We excluded children with thyroid dysfunction, nephrotic syndrome, autoimmune disease, liver disease, primary biliary cirrhosis, and obesity (body mass index >75th percentile for age and gender), as well as children referred via a cascade screening program and those from families with a known molecular diagnosis. Of the 269 children who remained after the exclusion criteria were applied, 255 (95%) carried a functional mutation (LDLR, 95%; APOB, 5%). In the vast majority of children with an ADH phenotype, a causative mutation can be identified, strongly suggesting that most of the large-effect genes underlying ADH are known to date.",4
"Exome sequencing covers >98% of mutations identified on targeted next generation sequencing panels. || Computer Simulation DNA Mutational Analysis Exome Female Genetic Diseases, Inborn Genetic Testing Genome, Human High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Mutation Sequence Analysis, DNA || With the expanded availability of next generation sequencing (NGS)-based clinical genetic tests, clinicians seeking to test patients with Mendelian diseases must weigh the superior coverage of targeted gene panels with the greater number of genes included in whole exome sequencing (WES) when considering their first-tier testing approach. Here, we use an in silico analysis to predict the analytic sensitivity of WES using pathogenic variants identified on targeted NGS panels as a reference. Corresponding nucleotide positions for 1533 different alterations classified as pathogenic or likely pathogenic identified on targeted NGS multi-gene panel tests in our laboratory were interrogated in data from 100 randomly-selected clinical WES samples to quantify the sequence coverage at each position. Pathogenic variants represented 91 genes implicated in hereditary cancer, X-linked intellectual disability, primary ciliary dyskinesia, Marfan syndrome/aortic aneurysms, cardiomyopathies and arrhythmias. When assessing coverage among 100 individual WES samples for each pathogenic variant (153,300 individual assessments), 99.7% (n = 152,798) would likely have been detected on WES. All pathogenic variants had at least some coverage on exome sequencing, with a total of 97.3% (n = 1491) detectable across all 100 individuals. For the remaining 42 pathogenic variants, the number of WES samples with adequate coverage ranged from 35 to 99. Factors such as location in GC-rich, repetitive, or homologous regions likely explain why some of these alterations were not detected across all samples. To validate study findings, a similar analysis was performed against coverage data from 60,706 exomes available through the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC). Results from this validation confirmed that 98.6% (91,743,296/93,062,298) of pathogenic variants demonstrated adequate depth for detection. Results from this in silico analysis suggest that exome sequencing may achieve a diagnostic yield similar to panel-based testing for Mendelian diseases.",3 4
"Molecular and functional characterization of eight novel GAA mutations in Italian infants with Pompe disease. ||  || We characterized 29 unrelated patients presenting with the severe form of Pompe disease (Glycogen Storage Disease Type II, acid maltase deficiency) and identified 26 pathogenic mutations divided over 28 different genotypes. Among the eight new mutations, five were exonic point mutations (c.572A>G, c.1124G>T, c.1202A>G, c.1564C>G and c.1796C>A) leading to codon changes (p.Y191C, p.R375L, p.Q401R, p.P522A and p.S599Y); two were intronic point mutations (c.-32-3C>A and c.1636+5G>C) affecting mRNA processing; one was a single base deletion (c.742delC) generating a truncated protein (p.L248PfsX20). A comprehensive evaluation, based on different methodological approaches, confirmed the detrimental effect of the eight mutations on the protein and its function. Structural alterations potentially induced by the five missense mutations were also predicted through visual inspection of the atomic model of the GAA protein, in terms of both function and spatial orientation of specific residues as well as disturbance generated by amino acid substitutions. Although the remarkable heterogeneity of the mutational spectrum in Pompe disease was already known, our data demonstrate and confirm the power of molecular and functional analysis in predicting the natural course of Pompe disease.",1 4 0
"Evaluation of the Mayo Clinic Phenotype-Based Genotype Predictor Score in Patients with Clinically Diagnosed Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. || Adult Aged Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic DNA Mutational Analysis Decision Support Techniques Echocardiography Electronic Health Records Female Genetic Counseling Genetic Markers Genetic Predisposition to Disease Heredity Humans Male Middle Aged Minnesota Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Predictive Value of Tests Prognosis Reproducibility of Results Retrospective Studies Risk Assessment Risk Factors || Genetic testing for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) can provide an important clinical marker for disease outcome and family screening. This study set out to validate our recently developed phenotype-based HCM genotype predictor score. Patients clinically diagnosed with HCM and evaluated by genetic counselors comprised the study cohort. Genotype score was derived based on clinical and echocardiographic variables. Total score was correlated with the yield of genetic testing. Of 564 HCM patients, 198 sought genetic testing (35 %; 55 % male; mean age at diagnosis, 50 ± 20 years). Of these, 101 patients (51 %) were genotype positive for a HCM-associated genetic mutation (55 % male; mean age at diagnosis, 42 ± 18 years). Cochran-Armitage analysis showed similar, statistically significant trends of increased yields for higher genotype scores for both the original and study cohort. Validated by the current study, this scoring system provides an easy-to-use, clinical tool to aid in determining the likelihood of a positive HCM genetic test.",4
"Variability in the ratio of mutant to wildtype myosin heavy chain present in the soleus muscle of patients with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A new approach for the quantification of mutant to wildtype protein. || Amino Acid Substitution Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Electrophoresis, Capillary Heterozygote Humans Mass Spectrometry Muscle, Skeletal Myosin Heavy Chains Peptide Fragments Point Mutation Protein Isoforms || The ratio of mutant to wildtype myosin heavy chain (beta-isoform, beta-MHC) in the soleus muscle of patients with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was determined by a combination of HPLC, mass spectrometry and capillary zone electrophoresis. In two patients, one with a Val 606 Met mutation and another with a Gly 584 Arg mutation, the fraction of mutant beta-MHC was only 12+/-6% and 23+/-0.7% of total beta-MHC, respectively. These results demonstrate the necessity to determine the ratio of mutant to wildtype protein for the interpretation of functional studies on biopsy material from heterozygous patients with an inherited disease.",4
"Early gastric cancer in young, asymptomatic carriers of germ-line E-cadherin mutations. || Adenocarcinoma Adult Age of Onset Cadherins Carcinoma, Signet Ring Cell Female Gastrectomy Genetic Counseling Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Pedigree Primary Prevention Stomach Stomach Neoplasms || Germ-line truncating mutations in the E-cadherin (CDH1) gene have been found in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. These families are characterized by a highly penetrant susceptibility to diffuse gastric cancer with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, predominantly in young persons. We describe genetic screening, surgical management, and pathological findings in young persons with truncating mutations in CDH1 from two unrelated families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Mutation-specific predictive genetic testing was performed by polymerase-chain-reaction amplification, followed by restriction-enzyme digestion and DNA sequencing in Family 1 and by heteroduplex analysis in Family 2. A total gastrectomy was performed prophylactically in five carriers of mutations who were between 22 and 40 years old. In each case, the entire mucosa of the stomach was extensively sampled for microscopical analysis. Superficial infiltrates of malignant signet-ring cells were identified in the surgical samples from all five persons who underwent gastrectomy. These early diffuse gastric cancers were multifocal in three of the five cases, and in one person infiltrates of malignant signet-ring cells were present in 65 of the 140 tissue blocks analyzed, representing in aggregate less than 2 percent of the gastric mucosa. We recommend genetic counseling and consideration of prophylactic gastrectomy in young, asymptomatic carriers of germ-line truncating CDH1 mutations who belong to families with highly penetrant hereditary diffuse gastric cancer.",2 4
"A novel inherited mutation of the transcription factor RUNX1 causes thrombocytopenia and may predispose to acute myeloid leukaemia. || Acute Disease Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA-Binding Proteins Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Hematopoiesis Humans Leukemia, Myeloid Male Pedigree Platelet Function Tests Point Mutation Proto-Oncogene Proteins Thrombocytopenia Transcription Factors || The RUNX1 (AML1, CBFA2) gene is a member of the runt transcription factor family, responsible for DNA binding and heterodimerization of other non-DNA binding transcription factors. RUNX1 plays an important part in regulating haematopoiesis and it is frequently disrupted by illegitimate somatic recombination in both acute myeloid and lymphoblastic leukaemia. Germline mutations of RUNX1 have also recently been described and are dominantly associated with inherited leukaemic conditions. We have identified a unique point mutation of the RUNX1 gene (A107P) in members of a family with autosomal dominant inheritance of thrombocytopenia. One member has developed acute myeloid leukaemia (AML).",2 4
"Mutation screen and RNA analysis disclose the changed splicing of the E-cadherin transcription in gastric cancer. || Adenocarcinoma Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Antigens, CD Base Sequence Cadherins Case-Control Studies Exons Female Follow-Up Studies Gene Deletion Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Neoplasm Grading Neoplasm Recurrence, Local Prognosis RNA Splicing Stomach Neoplasms || Gastric cancer (GC) is considered to be one of the leading cancers in East Asians, and mutations in the CDH1 gene and the reduced expression of E-cadherin are the most frequent genetic alterations in gastric cancer. In this paper, we reported two novel germline CDH1 nonsynonymous mutations, c.1296 C>G (N432 K) and c.1297 G>A (D433 N) detected in sporadic Chinese GC patients. RNA splicing analysis was used to evaluate mutations' effects on E-cadherin transcription and exon definition. We revealed that the c.1296 C>G (N432 K) variant can generate the E-cadherin exon9-skipping and may be a disease-causing mutation, while the c.1297 G>A (D433 N) mutation not. Moreover, we demonstrated the E-cadherin 1054del83 transcript is a frequent event in Chinese GC patients.",4 0
"The contribution of GJB2 mutations to slight or mild hearing loss in Australian elementary school children. || Alleles Australia Child Connexin 26 Connexins DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Testing Hearing Loss, Bilateral Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Mutation Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Schools || There is a lack of information on prevalence, cause and consequences of slight/mild bilateral sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) in children. We report the first systematic genetic analysis of the GJB2 gene in a population-derived sample of children with slight/mild bilateral SNHL. Hearing tests were conducted in 6240 Australian elementary school children in Grades 1 and 5. 55 children (0.88%) were found to have a slight/mild sensorineural hearing loss. 48 children with slight/mild sensorineural hearing loss and a matched group of 90 children with normal hearing participated in a genetic study investigating mutations in the GJB2 gene, coding for connexin 26, and the presence of the del(GJB6-D13S1830) and del(GJB6-D13S1854) deletions in the GJB6 gene, coding for connexin 30. Four of 48 children with slight/mild sensorineural hearing loss were homozygous for the GJB2 V37I change. The four children with homozygous V37I mutations were all of Asian background and analysis of SNPs in or near the GJB2 gene suggests that the V37I mutation arose from a single mutational event in the Asian population. Based on the prevalence of carriers of this change we conclude that V37I can be a causative mutation that is often associated with slight/mild sensorineural hearing loss. No other children in the slight/mild hearing loss group had a hearing loss related to a GJB2 mutation. One child with normal hearing was homozygous for the R127H change and we conclude that this change does not cause hearing loss. Two children of Asian background were carriers of the V37I mutation. Our data indicate that slight/mild sensorineural hearing loss due to the GJB2 V37I mutation is common in people of Asian background.",4
"A de novo mutation of the beta cardiac myosin heavy chain gene in an infantile restrictive cardiomyopathy. || Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Restrictive Fatal Outcome Humans Infant, Newborn Male Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains || Here we report the first pediatric case of restrictive cardiomyopathy secondary to a de novo mutation in the cardiac myosin heavy chain gene MYH7. The clinical course is characterized by an early onset of disease, mild hypertrophy of the left ventricle and a very short evolution to death. Because of the location of the mutation in the hinge region between the rod part and the globular head of the myosin molecule, it is possible that restrictive cardiomyopathy resulted from an impairment of flexion/extension of myosin heads during the contraction/relaxation cycle.",4
"Hydrops fetalis in a preterm newborn heterozygous for the c.4A>G SHOC2 mutation. || Heterozygote Humans Hydrops Fetalis Infant, Newborn Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Loose Anagen Hair Syndrome Mutation Noonan Syndrome || Fetal hydrops is a condition resulting from interstitial fluid accumulation in fetal compartments secondary to increased capillary permeability and characterized by high rates of perinatal mortality and morbidity. Clinical features include skin edema, hydrothorax, pericardial effusion, ascites with or without polyhydramnios, and placental edema. While it may occur as associated feature in multiple disorders, it has been documented to recur in Noonan syndrome, the most common disorder among RASopathies, but also in cardiofaciocutaneous and Costello syndromes. Here, we report on the occurrence of severe hydrops in a newborn heterozygous for the invariant c.4A>G missense change in SHOC2 which underlies Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair, documenting that it represents a clinically relevant complication in this condition, shared by RASopathies.",4
"Screening for PS1 mutations in a referral-based series of AD cases: 21 novel mutations. || Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Alzheimer Disease Genetic Testing Humans Membrane Proteins Middle Aged Mutation Presenilin-1 Referral and Consultation Survival Analysis || Mutations in the presenilin-1 gene (PS1) account for a majority of patients with early-onset familial AD. However, the clinical indications and algorithms for genetic testing in dementia are still evolving. The entire open reading frame of the PS1 gene was sequenced in a series of 414 consecutive patients referred for diagnostic testing, including 372 patients with AD and 42 asymptomatic persons with a strong family history of AD. Forty-eight independent patients screened had a PS1 mutation including 21 novel mutations. In addition, 3% of subjects (11/413) had a known polymorphism, the Glu318Gly substitution. The majority of the mutations were missense substitutions but there were three insertions and Delta exon 10 mutation. With six exceptions (codons 35, 178, 352, 354, 358, and 365) most of the mutations occurred at residues conserved in the homologous PS2 gene or in PS1 of other species. Eleven percent of a referral-based series of patients with AD can be explained by coding sequence mutations in the PS1 gene. The high frequency of PS1 mutations in this study indicates that screening for PS1 mutations in AD is likely to be successful, especially when directed at patients with a positive family history with onset before 60 years (90% of those with PS1 mutations were affected by age 60 years). This will also have significance for the secondary identification of at-risk relatives who might be candidates for future prophylactic therapies for AD.",4
"Molecular analysis and protein processing in late-onset Pompe disease patients with low levels of acid α-glucosidase activity. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Blotting, Western Child Enzyme Activation Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Middle Aged Mutation Protein Modification, Translational Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II, acid maltase deficiency) is caused by deficiency of lysosomal acid α-glucosidase (GAA). A few late-onset patients have been reported with skin fibroblast GAA activity levels of <2%. We measured GAA activity in skin fibroblasts from 101 patients with late-onset Pompe disease. Whenever possible, we performed Western blot analysis and correlated the results with GAA activity and GAA gene mutations. Thirteen patients (13%) had skin fibroblast GAA activity of <1% of normal. Although there was wide genetic heterogeneity, none of these patients carried the common late-onset mutation c.-32-13T > G. We performed Western blot on 11 patients with <1% GAA activity. All produced GAA protein that was at lower levels and/or was abnormally processed. There is no common mutation associated with <1% GAA activity in late-onset Pompe disease patients. Most patients produce unprocessed forms of GAA protein compared with patients with higher GAA activity.",3 1 4
"Novel mutations widen the phenotypic spectrum of slow skeletal/β-cardiac myosin (MYH7) distal myopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Biopsy Cardiac Myosins Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Distal Myopathies Female Humans Immunohistochemistry Infant Infant, Newborn Male Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Phenotype Young Adult || Laing early onset distal myopathy and myosin storage myopathy are caused by mutations of slow skeletal/β-cardiac myosin heavy chain encoded by the gene MYH7, as is a common form of familial hypertrophic/dilated cardiomyopathy. The mechanisms by which different phenotypes are produced by mutations in MYH7, even in the same region of the gene, are not known. To explore the clinical spectrum and pathobiology, we screened the MYH7 gene in 88 patients from 21 previously unpublished families presenting with distal or generalized skeletal muscle weakness, with or without cardiac involvement. Twelve novel mutations have been identified in thirteen families. In one of these families, the father of the proband was found to be a mosaic for the MYH7 mutation. In eight cases, de novo mutation appeared to have occurred, which was proven in four. The presenting complaint was footdrop, sometimes leading to delayed walking or tripping, in members of 17 families (81%), with other presentations including cardiomyopathy in infancy, generalized floppiness, and scoliosis. Cardiac involvement as well as skeletal muscle weakness was identified in nine of 21 families. Spinal involvement such as scoliosis or rigidity was identified in 12 (57%). This report widens the clinical and pathological phenotypes, and the genetics of MYH7 mutations leading to skeletal muscle diseases.",4
"Germline mutations in the DNA damage response genes BRCA1, BRCA2, BARD1 and TP53 in patients with therapy related myeloid neoplasms. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over BRCA1 Protein BRCA2 Protein Child Child, Preschool DNA Damage DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome Heterozygote Humans Immunohistochemistry Incidence Male Middle Aged Neoplasms, Second Primary Pedigree Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Tumor Suppressor Proteins Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases Young Adult || Therapy related myeloid neoplasms (t-MNs) are complex diseases originating from an interplay between exogenous toxicities and a susceptible organism. It has been hypothesised that in a subset of cases t-MNs develop in the context of hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes. The study systematically evaluated pedigrees of patients with t-MNs for cancer incidences and the possibility of a hereditary cancer predisposition syndrome. In addition, mutational analyses were performed using constitutional DNA from index patients, and deleterious heterozygous germline mutations were assessed for loss of heterozygosity in sorted leukaemic cells by single nucleotide polymorphism array. A nuclear pedigree was obtained in 51/53 patients with t-MNs resulting in a total of 828 individuals analysed. With a standardised incidence ratio of 1.03 (95% CI 0.74 to 1.39), the tumour incidence of first- degree relatives was not increased. However, six pedigrees were suggestive for a hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome, three of a Li-Fraumeni like syndrome, and three index patients showed multiple primary neoplasms. Mutational analysis revealed two BRCA1 (c.3112G→T, c.5251C→T), one BRCA2 (c.4027A→G), two BARD1 (C557S) and four TP53 germline mutations (g.18508_18761delinsGCC, c.847C→T, c.845_848dupGGCG, c.1146delA) in nine of 53 (17%) index patients with t-MNs. Loss of heterozygosity in leukaemic cells was demonstrated for the BRCA1c.3112G→T and TP53c.845_848dupGGCG mutations, respectively. It is concluded that a proportion of patients with t-MNs carry cancer susceptibility mutations which are likely to contribute to therapy related leukaemogenesis.",4
"BRCA1, TP53, and CHEK2 germline mutations in uterine serous carcinoma. || Adult Aged BRCA1 Protein Carcinoma Checkpoint Kinase 2 DNA Mutational Analysis Endometrial Neoplasms Female Gene Frequency High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Middle Aged Prospective Studies Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Uterine serous carcinoma (USC) is not recognized as part of any defined hereditary cancer syndrome, and its association with hereditary breast and ovarian carcinoma and Lynch syndrome are uncertain. Using targeted capture and massively parallel genomic sequencing, 151 subjects with USC were assessed for germline mutations in 30 tumor suppressor genes, including BRCA1 (breast cancer 1, early onset), BRCA2, the DNA mismatch repair genes (MLH1 [mutL homolog 1], MSH2 [mutS homolog 2], MSH6, PMS2 [postmeiotic segregation increased 2]), TP53 (tumor protein p53), and 10 other genes in the Fanconi anemia-BRCA pathway. Ten cases with < 10% serous histology were also assessed. Seven subjects (4.6%) carried germline loss-of-function mutations: 3 subjects (2.0%) with mutations in BRCA1, 2 subjects (1.3%) with mutations in TP53, and 2 subjects (1.3%) with mutations in CHEK2 (checkpoint kinase 2). One subject with < 10% serous histology had an MSH6 mutation. Subjects with MSH6 and TP53 mutations had neither personal nor family histories suggestive of Lynch or Li-Fraumeni syndromes. Of the 22 women with USC and a personal history of breast carcinoma, the frequency of BRCA1 mutations was 9%, compared to 0.9% in 119 women with no such history. Approximately 5% of women with USC have germline mutations in 3 different tumor suppressor genes: BRCA1, CHEK2, and TP53. Mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes that cause Lynch syndrome are rare in USC. The germline BRCA1 mutation rate in USC subjects of 2% is higher than expected in a nonfounder population, suggesting that USC is associated with hereditary breast and ovarian carcinoma in a small proportion of cases. Women with USC and breast cancer should be offered genetic testing for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations.",4
"Molecular basis of familial hypercholesterolemia in Brazil: Identification of seven novel LDLR gene mutations. ||  || Low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene mutations cause familial hypercholesterol-emia (FH), one of the most common single gene disorders. The spectrum of LDLR mutations in Brazil is not known. The aim of this study was the characterization of LDLR mutations in 35 unrelated Brazilian patients with heterozygous FH. The promoter region, the 18 exons and the flanking intron sequences of the LDLR gene were screened by PCR-SSCP analysis and by DNA sequencing. In addition, we have screened the apolipoprotein B gene (APOB) for known mutations (R3500Q and R3531C) that cause Familial defective apo B-100 (FDB) by PCR-RFLP procedure. We found two nonsense (E92X and C371X) and six missense LDLR mutations (R236W, G322S, G352D, A370T, C675W and C677Y), that were previously described in FH patients from other populations. We also found five novel missense [G(-20)R, T476P, V503G, D580H and S652R] and two novel frame shift LDLR mutations (FsR757 and FsS828). Four patients were found to carry two different mutations in the LDLR gene: G352D and A370T (one patient), S652R and C675W (one patient) and T476P and V503G (two patients). APOB mutations were not found. These findings demonstrate that there is a broad spectrum of mutations in the LDLR gene in FH individuals from Brazil.",4
"A detailed clinical and molecular survey of subjects with nonsyndromic USH2A retinopathy reveals an allelic hierarchy of disease-causing variants. || Adult Aged Alleles DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Genetic Testing Genotype Humans Introns Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Retinal Diseases Retinitis Pigmentosa Surveys and Questionnaires Usher Syndromes || Defects in USH2A cause both isolated retinal disease and Usher syndrome (ie, retinal disease and deafness). To gain insights into isolated/nonsyndromic USH2A retinopathy, we screened USH2A in 186 probands with recessive retinal disease and no hearing complaint in childhood (discovery cohort) and in 84 probands with recessive retinal disease (replication cohort). Detailed phenotyping, including retinal imaging and audiological assessment, was performed in individuals with two likely disease-causing USH2A variants. Further genetic testing, including screening for a deep-intronic disease-causing variant and large deletions/duplications, was performed in those with one likely disease-causing change. Overall, 23 of 186 probands (discovery cohort) were found to harbour two likely disease-causing variants in USH2A. Some of these variants were predominantly associated with nonsyndromic retinal degeneration ('retinal disease-specific'); these included the common c.2276 G>T, p.(Cys759Phe) mutation and five additional variants: c.2802 T>G, p.(Cys934Trp); c.10073 G>A, p.(Cys3358Tyr); c.11156 G>A, p.(Arg3719His); c.12295-3 T>A; and c.12575 G>A, p.(Arg4192His). An allelic hierarchy was observed in the discovery cohort and confirmed in the replication cohort. In nonsyndromic USH2A disease, retinopathy was consistent with retinitis pigmentosa and the audiological phenotype was variable. USH2A retinopathy is a common cause of nonsyndromic recessive retinal degeneration and has a different mutational spectrum to that observed in Usher syndrome. The following model is proposed: the presence of at least one 'retinal disease-specific' USH2A allele in a patient with USH2A-related disease results in the preservation of normal hearing. Careful genotype-phenotype studies such as this will become increasingly important, especially now that high-throughput sequencing is widely used in the clinical setting.",1 4
"First description of germline mosaicism in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Female Genes, Dominant Haplotypes Humans Male Microsatellite Repeats Mosaicism Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous disease caused by mutations in seven sarcomeric protein genes. It is known to be transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait with rare de novo mutations.A French family in which two members are affected by hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was clinically screened with electrocardiography and echocardiography. Genetic analyses were performed on leucocyte DNA by haplotype analysis with microsatellite markers at the MYH7 locus and mutation screening by single strand conformation polymorphism analysis. Two subjects exhibited severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A mutation in the MYH7 gene was found in exon 14 (Arg453Cys). The two affected patients were carriers of the mutation, which was not found in the circulating lymphocytes of their parents. Haplotype analysis at the MYH7 locus with two intragenic microsatellite markers (MYOI and MYOII) and the absence of the mutation in the father's sperm DNA suggested that the mutation had been inherited from the mother. However, it was not found in either her fibroblasts or hair. This is the first description of germline mosaicism shown by molecular genetic analysis in an autosomal dominant disorder and more especially in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This mosaicism had been inherited from the mother but did not affect her somatic cells. Such a phenomenon might account for some de novo mutations in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.",2 4
"Genetic testing for dilated cardiomyopathy in clinical practice. || Adolescent Adult Cardiomyopathy, Dilated Carrier Proteins Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genetic Variation Humans Infant Male Medical History Taking Middle Aged Sarcomeres Young Adult || Familial involvement is common in dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) and >40 genes have been implicated in causing disease. However, the role of genetic testing in clinical practice is not well defined. We examined the experience of clinical genetic testing in a diverse DCM population to characterize the prevalence and predictors of gene mutations. We studied 264 unrelated adult and pediatric DCM index patients referred to 1 reference lab for clinical genetic testing. Up to 10 genes were analyzed (MYH7, TNNT2, TNNI3, TPM1, MYBPC3, ACTC, LMNA, PLN, TAZ, and LDB3), and 70% of patients were tested for all genes. The mean age was 26.6 ± 21.3 years, and 52% had a family history of DCM. Rigorous criteria were used to classify DNA variants as clinically relevant (mutations), variants of unknown clinical significance (VUS), or presumed benign. Mutations were found in 17.4% of patients, commonly involving MYH7, LMNA, or TNNT2 (78%). An additional 10.6% of patients had VUS. Genetic testing was rarely positive in older patients without a family history of DCM. Conversely in pediatric patients, family history did not increase the sensitivity of genetic testing. Using rigorous criteria for classifying DNA variants, mutations were identified in 17% of a diverse group of DCM index patients referred for clinical genetic testing. The low sensitivity of genetic testing in DCM reflects limitations in both current methodology and knowledge of DCM-associated genes. However, if mutations are identified, genetic testing can help guide family management.",2 4
"Molecular testing for familial hypercholesterolaemia-associated mutations in a UK-based cohort: development of an NGS-based method and comparison with multiplex polymerase chain reaction and oligonucleotide arrays. || Next-generation sequencing apolipoprotein B familial hypercholesterolaemia mutation low-density lipoprotein receptor molecular screening || Background Detection of disease-associated mutations in patients with familial hypercholesterolaemia is crucial for early interventions to reduce risk of cardiovascular disease. Screening for these mutations represents a methodological challenge since more than 1200 different causal mutations in the low-density lipoprotein receptor has been identified. A number of methodological approaches have been developed for screening by clinical diagnostic laboratories. Methods Using primers targeting, the low-density lipoprotein receptor, apolipoprotein B, and proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9, we developed a novel Ion Torrent-based targeted re-sequencing method. We validated this in a West Midlands-UK small cohort of 58 patients screened in parallel with other mutation-targeting methods, such as multiplex polymerase chain reaction (Elucigene FH20), oligonucleotide arrays (Randox familial hypercholesterolaemia array) or the Illumina next-generation sequencing platform. Results In this small cohort, the next-generation sequencing method achieved excellent analytical performance characteristics and showed 100% and 89% concordance with the Randox array and the Elucigene FH20 assay. Investigation of the discrepant results identified two cases of mutation misclassification of the Elucigene FH20 multiplex polymerase chain reaction assay. A number of novel mutations not previously reported were also identified by the next-generation sequencing method. Conclusions Ion Torrent-based next-generation sequencing can deliver a suitable alternative for the molecular investigation of familial hypercholesterolaemia patients, especially when comprehensive mutation screening for rare or unknown mutations is required.",4
"A multicenter study of the frequency and distribution of GJB2 and GJB6 mutations in a large North American cohort. ||  || The aim of the study was to determine the actual GJB2 and GJB6 mutation frequencies in North America after several years of generalized testing for autosomal recessive nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss to help guide diagnostic testing algorithms, especially in light of molecular diagnostic follow-up to universal newborn hearing screening. Mutation types, frequencies, ethnic distributions, and genotype-phenotype correlations for GJB2 and GJB6 were assessed in a very large North American cohort. GJB2 variants were identified in 1796 (24.3%) of the 7401 individuals examined, with 399 (5.4%) homozygous and 429 (5.8%) compound heterozygous. GJB6 deletion testing was performed in 12.0% (888/7401) of all cases. The >300-kb deletion was identified in only nine individuals (1.0%), all of whom were compound heterozygous for mutations in GJB2 and GJB6. Among a total of 139 GJB2 variants identified, 53 (38.1%) were previously unreported, presumably representing novel pathogenic or benign variants. The frequency and distribution of sequence changes in GJB2 and GJB6 in North America differ from those previously reported, suggesting a considerable role for loci other than GJB2 and GJB6 in the etiology of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss, with minimal prevalence of the GJB6 deletion.",1 4
"Mutations in the genes encoding the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1A) and 4 alpha (HNF4A) in maturity-onset diabetes of the young. ||  || Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes mellitus characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, early age of onset (often <25 years of age), and pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. MODY is both clinically and genetically heterogeneous, with six different genes identified to date; glucokinase (GCK), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1A, or TCF1), hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF4A), insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF1 or PDX1), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta (HNF1B or TCF2), and neurogenic differentiation 1 (NEUROD1). Mutations in the HNF1A gene are a common cause of MODY in the majority of populations studied. A total of 193 different mutations have been described in 373 families. The most common mutation is Pro291fs (P291fsinsC) in the polycytosine (poly C) tract of exon 4, which has been reported in 65 families. HNF4A mutations are rarer; 31 mutations reported in 40 families. Sensitivity to treatment with sulfonylurea tablets is a feature of both HNF1A and HNF4A mutations. The identification of an HNF1A or 4A gene mutation confirms a diagnosis of MODY and has important implications for clinical management.",4
"A human MYBPC3 mutation appearing about 10 centuries ago results in a hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with delayed onset, moderate evolution but with a risk of sudden death. || Adult Age of Onset Biological Evolution Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Death, Sudden Female Founder Effect Genotype Haplotypes Heterozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Risk Factors Sarcomeres || Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a genetically heterogeneous disease. One specific mutation in the MYBPC3 gene is highly prevalent in center east of France giving an opportunity to define the clinical profile of this specific mutation. HCM probands were screened for mutation in the MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNT2 and TNNI3 genes. Carriers of the MYBPC3 IVS20-2A>G mutation were genotyped with 8 microsatellites flanking this gene. The age of this MYBPC3 mutation was inferred with the software ESTIAGE. The age at first symptom, diagnosis, first complication, first severe complication and the rate of sudden death were compared between carriers of the IVS20-2 mutation (group A) and carriers of all other mutations (group B) using time to event curves and log rank test. Out of 107 HCM probands, 45 had a single heterozygous mutation in one of the 4 tested sarcomeric genes including 9 patients with the MYBPC3 IVS20-2A>G mutation. The IVS20-2 mutation in these 9 patients and their 25 mutation carrier relatives was embedded in a common haplotype defined after genotyping 4 polymorphic markers on each side of the MYBPC3 gene. This result supports the hypothesis of a common ancestor. Furthermore, we evaluated that the mutation occurred about 47 generations ago, approximately at the 10th century.We then compared the clinical profile of the IVS20-2 mutation carriers (group A) and the carriers of all other mutations (group B). Age at onset of symptoms was similar in the 34 group A cases and the 73 group B cases but group A cases were diagnosed on average 15 years later (log rank test p = 0.022). Age of first complication and first severe complication was delayed in group A vs group B cases but the prevalence of sudden death and age at death was similar in both groups. A founder mutation arising at about the 10th century in the MYBPC3 gene accounts for 8.4% of all HCM in center east France and results in a cardiomyopathy starting late and evolving slowly but with an apparent risk of sudden death similar to other sarcomeric mutations.",4
"Familial Hypercholesterolemia in Greek children and their families: genotype-to-phenotype correlations and a reconsideration of LDLR mutation spectrum. || Adolescent Alleles Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Female Genetic Association Studies Genotype Geography Greece Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Lipids Male Mutation Phenotype Receptors, LDL || Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a common lipid metabolism disease, resulting in premature atherosclerosis, even from childhood. We aimed to define the genetic basis of FH in children and their families, to refine the spectrum of Low-Density Lipoprotein Receptor gene (LDLR) mutations and identify genotype-to-phenotype correlations in patients of Greek origin. LDLR was analyzed in 561 patients from 262 families, by whole-gene sequencing. Children with identified LDLR mutations showed higher lipid levels compared to non-carriers. Molecular analysis identified a mutation in 53.4% of index cases. Twenty six LDLR mutations were identified, including 19 point mutations, 2 nonsense mutations, 3 splice site mutations and 2 small insertions. Amongst patients with common mutations, carriers of c.1646G > A and c.1285G > A showed higher lipid levels, whereas carriers of c.858C > A and c.81C > G showed a milder phenotype. The spectrum of LDLR mutations in Greece is refined and expanded, with more patients analyzed by whole-gene sequencing. Although a quick screening method is feasible for the Greek population, whole-gene sequencing is essential to identify rare variants. Children with border line lipid levels and a family history of hypercholesterolemia should be considered for molecular diagnosis, since carriers of certain mutations show milder phenotypes and may be missed during clinical diagnosis.",2 4
"p53 compound heterozygosity in a severely affected child with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. || Adult Cell Division Child Child, Preschool Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p21 Cyclins DNA, Ribosomal Female Gene Expression Regulation Genes, p53 Genetic Carrier Screening Genetic Variation Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Multigene Family Pedigree Saccharomyces cerevisiae Transcription, Genetic Transfection Tumor Cells, Cultured || The Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a rare, dominantly inherited syndrome that features high risk of cancers in childhood and early adulthood. Affected families tend to develop bone and soft tissue sarcomas, breast cancers, brain tumors, leukemias, and adrenocortical carcinomas. In some kindreds, the genetic abnormality associated with this cancer phenotype is a heterozygous germline mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor gene. Recently, we identified one patient who presented in early childhood with multiple primary cancers and who harbored three germline p53 alterations (R156H and R267Q on the maternal allele and R290H on the paternal allele). To classify the biologic effects of these alterations, functional properties of each of the p53 mutants were examined using in vitro assays of cellular growth suppression and transcriptional activation. Each amino acid substitution conferred partial or complete loss of wild-type p53 function, but the child completed normal embryonic development. This observation has not been previously reported in a human, but is consistent with observations of normal embryogenesis in p53-deficient mice.",2 4 0 3
"Prevalence of pathogenetic MC4R mutations in Italian children with early onset obesity, tall stature and familial history of obesity. || Adolescent Age of Onset Amino Acid Substitution Body Height Child Cohort Studies Female Humans Italy Male Mutation Obesity Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Prevalence Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 || Melanocortin-4-receptor (MC4R) mutations represent the most frequent genetic cause of non-syndromic early onset obesity. Children carrying MC4R mutations seem to show a particular phenotype characterized by early onset, severe obesity and high stature. To verify whether MC4R mutations are associated with this particular phenotype in the Italian pediatric population, we decided to screen the MC4R gene in a group of obese children selected on the basis of their phenotype. To perform this study, a multicentric approach was designed. Particularly, to be enrolled in the study subjects needed to meet the following criteria: Body mass index > or = 3 deviation scores according to age and sex, familiar history of obesity (at least one parent obese), obesity onset before the 10 years old, height > or = 2 deviation scores. The coding region of MC4R gene was screened in 240 obese children (mean age 8.3 +/- 3.1, mean BMI 30.8 +/- 5.4) and in 200 controls (mean age 8.1 +/- 2.8; mean BMI 14.2 +/- 2.5). Three mutations have been found in five obese children. The S127L (C380T), found in three unrelated children, had been described and functionally characterized previously. The Q307X (C919T) and the Y332H (T994C) mutations were found in two patients. Functional studies showed that only Q307X impaired protein function. The low prevalence of MC4R mutations (1.6%) in this group of obese children selected according to the obesity degree, the tall stature and the family history of obesity was similar to the prevalence observed in previous screenings performed in obese adults and in not phenotypically selected obese children.",2 4
"BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 mutations in very early-onset breast cancer with associated risks to relatives. || Adenocarcinoma Adult Breast Neoplasms Female Genes, BRCA1 Genes, BRCA2 Genes, p53 Humans Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Penetrance Risk Factors || Pathological mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 are associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. This study evaluated mutation frequency of these genes in early-onset breast cancer patients, and correlated this with family history and determined relative risks to family members. Patients with breast adenocarcinoma diagnosed 30 years were ascertained between 1980 and 1997. Family history was established and mutation screening of BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 genes was performed. Estimates of penetrance and relative risk were undertaken. DNA was obtained from 100/139 women. 17/36 familial cases had a BRCA1, BRCA2 or TP53 mutation. Of 64 non-familial cases, one BRCA2, two BRCA1 and two TP53 mutations were detected. Penetrance estimates (by age 70) for breast cancer were 84% for BRCA1 mutations and 91% for BRCA2 mutations and for ovarian cancer, 60% and 26%, respectively. Relative risks associated with mutations were consistent with previous studies. BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in patients with breast cancer 30 years are predicted strongly by family history. The majority of families with ovarian cancer were due to mutations in BRCA1/2 whereas these mutations only accounted for 30-50% of the excess breast cancers.",4
"Molecular characterization of familial hypercholesterolemia in German and Greek patients. ||  || We used the denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) method to define mutations in the promoter region, the 18 exons, and their flanking intronic sequences of the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene LDLR, causing familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) phenotype in 100 German and in 100 Greek hypercholesterolemic individuals. In addition, we tested all patients for the presence of mutations in codons 3456-3553 of the gene encoding apolipoprotein B-100 (APOB). Twenty-six aberrant DGGE patterns were identified and subsequently directly sequenced. In LDLR, two novel missense mutations (c.1957G>T/p.V653F, c.647 G>A/p.C216Y) and one novel homozygous base substitution c.1-156 C>T in the repeat 2 of the promoter region were identified among German FH patients; one novel splice site c.1060+10C>G was identified among Greek FH patients. One of the German FH patients was a carrier for the mutations c.1171G>A/p.A391T and p.V653F, and two of the Greek FH patients were compound heterozygotes for the mutations c.1150C>T/p.Q384X and c.1158C>G/p.D386E. Two German FH patients carried the mutation p.R3500Q within APOB. Comparing the mutations within the LDLR gene of the two European FH populations, the German population seems to be more heterogeneous than the Greek cohort. Further studies in progress are trying to elucidate the responsiveness to drug therapy in association with LDLR genotype and the nutritional habits of the two FH populations.",4
"Molecular apocrine differentiation is a common feature of breast cancer in patients with germline PTEN mutations. || Breast Neoplasms Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases Cluster Analysis Comparative Genomic Hybridization Gene Expression Profiling Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Immunohistochemistry Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases Principal Component Analysis Receptor, ErbB-2 Signal Transduction gamma-Glutamyltransferase || Breast carcinoma is the main malignant tumor occurring in patients with Cowden disease, a cancer-prone syndrome caused by germline mutation of the tumor suppressor gene PTEN characterized by the occurrence throughout life of hyperplastic, hamartomatous and malignant growths affecting various organs. The absence of known histological features for breast cancer arising in a PTEN-mutant background prompted us to explore them for potential new markers. We first performed a microarray study of three tumors from patients with Cowden disease in the context of a transcriptomic study of 74 familial breast cancers. A subsequent histological and immunohistochemical study including 12 additional cases of Cowden disease breast carcinomas was performed to confirm the microarray data. Unsupervised clustering of the 74 familial tumors followed the intrinsic gene classification of breast cancer except for a group of five tumors that included the three Cowden tumors. The gene expression profile of the Cowden tumors shows considerable overlap with that of a breast cancer subgroup known as molecular apocrine breast carcinoma, which is suspected to have increased androgenic signaling and shows frequent ERBB2 amplification in sporadic tumors. The histological and immunohistochemical study showed that several cases had apocrine histological features and expressed GGT1, which is a potential new marker for apocrine breast carcinoma. These data suggest that activation of the ERBB2-PI3K-AKT pathway by loss of PTEN at early stages of tumorigenesis promotes the formation of breast tumors with apocrine features.",3 4
"HBOC multi-gene panel testing: comparison of two sequencing centers. || Breast Neoplasms Computational Biology DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Testing Genomics Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Mutation Reproducibility of Results || Multi-gene panels are used to identify genetic causes of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) in large patient cohorts. This study compares the diagnostic workflow in two centers and gives valuable insights into different next-generation sequencing (NGS) strategies. Moreover, we present data from 620 patients sequenced at both centers. Both sequencing centers are part of the German consortium for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (GC-HBOC). All 620 patients included in this study were selected following standard BRCA1/2 testing guidelines. A set of 10 sequenced genes was analyzed per patient. Twelve samples were exchanged and sequenced at both centers. NGS results were highly concordant in 12 exchanged samples (205/206 variants = 99.51 %). One non-pathogenic variant was missed at center B due to a sequencing gap (no technical coverage). The custom enrichment at center B was optimized during this study; for example, the average number of missing bases was reduced by a factor of four (vers. 1: 1939.41, vers. 4: 506.01 bp). There were no sequencing gaps at center A, but four CCDS exons were not included in the enrichment. Pathogenic mutations were found in 12.10 % (75/620) of all patients: 4.84 % (30/620) in BRCA1, 4.35 % in BRCA2 (27/620), 0.97 % in CHEK2 (6/620), 0.65 % in ATM (4/620), 0.48 % in CDH1 (3/620), 0.32 % in PALB2 (2/620), 0.32 % in NBN (2/620), and 0.16 % in TP53 (1/620). NGS diagnostics for HBOC-related genes is robust, cost effective, and the method of choice for genetic testing in large cohorts. Adding 8 genes to standard BRCA1- and BRCA2-testing increased the mutation detection rate by one-third.",4
"Preliminary Screening Results of Fabry Disease in Kidney Transplantation Patients: A Single-Center Study. || Adult Aged Fabry Disease Female Genetic Testing Humans Kidney Transplantation Male Middle Aged Mutation Prevalence Renal Insufficiency, Chronic alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is a rare X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by the deficiency of alfa-galactosidase A (AGALA) and leads to progressive impairment of renal function in almost all male patients and in a significant proportion of female patients. FD is underdiagnosed or even misdiagnosed in patients undergoing kidney transplantation. We initiated a selective screening study for FD among kidney transplant patients in our center. In this study, 1095 male and female patients were included. Dried blood samples on Guthrie papers were used to analyze galactosidase A enzyme for male patients. Genetic analyses were performed in all female and male patients with low enzyme activity. In total, 648 female and 447 male patients with functioning grafts were evaluated. Among 1095 patients, 5 male patients had AGALA activity below threshold and 3 female patients had galactosidase alpha gene DNA variations. One male patient had a disease-causing mutation. The other 4 patients had polymorphisms causing low enzyme activity. All the 3 female patients had mutations that were associated with FD according to Human Gene Mutation Database (ID: CM025441). In contrast, these mutations were reported as unknown clinical significance in Clinvar (rs149391489). The patients with clinical findings suggesting FD were planned to be analyzed for Lyso Gb3. In our selective screening study, 8 variations were found among 1095 kidney transplantation patients, which needs further investigation to determine causes of FD. Clinical findings, physical examination, and family history are also necessary to evaluate the genetic changes as a mutation in this selected population.",3 4
"Molecular genetics of familial hypercholesterolemia in Spain: Ten novel LDLR mutations and population analysis. ||  || Mutations underlying FH in Spain are largely unknown because only a few and limited surveys have been carried out on Spanish FH patients up to now. To gain information on this issue, we have analysed a group of 113 unrelated Spanish FH patients from an eastern area of Spain (Valencian Community). We have screened the LDLR gene by Southern blot and PCR-SSCP analysis to detect large rearrangements and small mutations, respectively. In addition, we have screened the Apo B gene for mutations known to cause FDB by PCR-SSCP analysis. We have identified a total of 47 different mutations in the LDLR gene (5 large rearrangements, and 42 small mutations, which were characterized by DNA sequencing), 19 of which have not been described in other populations (Valencia-1 to -4, 112insA, P160R, 790DelATGA, 920insTCAG, G642E, and the ten novel mutations E246A, 884delT, I289T, S305F, Q328X, Y354C, I603del, 2312-3C>A, V779M, and N804K). Three of these mutations (15%) were present in more than 1 proband, being mutation 112insA the most prevalent (frequency approximately 8%) in our sample. The Apo B gene R3500Q mutation was found in only one patient and no underlying defect was found in about 27% of patients. Our data support the notion that Spaniards represent a heterogeneous population with its own spectrum of LDLR gene mutations and that, in our population, FDB has a lower frequency or a milder expression than in central Europe countries.",4
"E-cadherin is a tumour/invasion suppressor gene mutated in human lobular breast cancers. ||  || Compelling experimental evidence exists for a potent invasion suppressor role of the cell-cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin. In addition, a tumour suppressor effect has been suggested for E-cadherin. In human cancers, partial or complete loss of E-cadherin expression correlates with malignancy. To investigate the molecular basis for this altered expression we developed a comprehensive PCR/SSCP mutation screen for the human E-cadherin gene. For 49 breast cancer patients the occurrence of tumour-specific mutations in the E-cadherin gene was examined. No relevant DNA changes were encountered in any of 42 infiltrative ductal or medullary breast carcinoma samples. In contrast, four out of seven infiltrative lobular breast carcinomas harboured protein truncation mutations (three nonsense and one frameshift) in the extracellular part of the E-cadherin protein. Each of the four lobular carcinomas with E-cadherin mutations showed tumour-specific loss of heterozygosity of chromosomal region 16q22.1 containing the E-cadherin locus. In compliance with this, no E-cadherin expression was detectable by immunohistochemistry in these four tumours. These findings offer a molecular explanation for the typical scattered tumour cell growth in infiltrative lobular breast cancer.",4
"PCSK9 variation and association with blood pressure in African Americans: preliminary findings from the HyperGEN and REGARDS studies. ||  || Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (encoded by PCSK9) plays a well-known role in the regulation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptors, and an inhibitor of this enzyme is a promising new therapeutic for hyperlipidemia. Recently, animal and human studies also implicate PCSK9 genetic variation in the regulation of blood pressure. The goal of this study was to examine if common and rare polymorphisms in PCSK9 are associated with blood pressure in an African-American population at high risk for cardiovascular disease. Using genomic data assayed on the Affymetrix 6.0 array (n = 1199) and the Illumina HumanExome Beadchip (n = 1966) from the Hypertension Genetic Epidemiology Network (HyperGEN), we tested the association of PCSK9 polymorphisms with blood pressure. We used linear mixed models and the sequence kernel association test (SKAT) to assess the association of 31 common and 19 rare variants with blood pressure. The models were adjusted for age, sex, center, smoking status, principal components for ancestry and diabetes as fixed effects and family as a random effect. The results showed a marginally significant effect of two genome-wide association study (GWAS) single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs12048828: β = 1.8, P = 0.05 and rs9730100: β = 1.0, P = 0.05) with diastolic blood pressure (DBP); however these results were not significant after correction for multiple testing. Rare variants were cumulatively associated with DBP (P = 0.04), an effect that was strengthened by restriction to non-synonymous or stop-gain SNPs (P = 0.02). While gene-based results for DBP did not replicate (P = 0.36), we found an association with SBP (P = 0.04) in the Reasons for Geographic And Racial Differences in Stroke study (REGARDS). The findings here suggest rare variants in PCSK9 may influence blood pressure among African Americans, laying the ground work for further validation studies.",4
"Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome among children diagnosed with pediatric cancer in Southern Brazil. || Adolescent Adrenal Cortex Neoplasms Adrenocortical Carcinoma Brazil Carcinoma Child Child, Preschool Choroid Plexus Neoplasms Female Gene Rearrangement Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Middle Aged Neoplasms Prevalence Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || Pediatric cancers are a feature in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome and its variant Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFS/LFL). To the best of the authors' knowledge, TP53 germline mutations are currently the only molecular defect known to be associated with this disease. Recently, a specific germline mutation in this gene, p.R337H, has been reported at a high prevalence in Brazil. The prevalence of LFS/LFL was investigated in children with cancer who were diagnosed with tumors on the LFS/LFL spectrum and in a small consecutive series of controls without cancer. The prevalence of the germline p.R337H mutation and of other germline TP53 mutations was investigated in a general group of children with cancer and exclusively in children fulfilling the clinical criteria for LFS/LFL, respectively. Among the 65 children without cancer, 1.5% had a family history of LFL whereas of the 292 children with cancer, 25.3% had a family history of LFL (P < .001). Screening for the p.R337H mutation identified 11 carriers (3.7%), 9 of whom were diagnosed with adrenocortical carcinomas (ACC) and 2 of whom were diagnosed with choroid plexus carcinomas. One of the ACC probands was homozygous mutant. The Brazilian founder haplotype and loss of heterozygosity at the p.R337H locus were present in all carriers. In addition, direct sequencing of the entire TP53 coding region and gene rearrangement analysis of probands fulfilling the criteria for LFL (Eeles 2 criteria, Birch and/or Chompret criteria) and who were negative for the p.R337H mutation revealed a DNA-binding domain pathogenic mutation, p.G245S, in 1 child. TP53 p.R337H testing should be offered to Brazilian children diagnosed with ACC and choroid plexus carcinoma. A significant percentage of children with cancer in southern Brazil fulfill the criteria for LFL and should be referred for genetic risk assessment.",2 4 3
"The identification of two low-density lipoprotein receptor gene mutations in South African familial hypercholesterolaemia. ||  || Two point mutations were discovered in the low-density lipoprotein genes of patients with familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH). Defective genes were cloned and/or amplified by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method and the DNA sequences determined. A guanine to adenine base transition in exon 4 was found to be the molecular defect in 20% of cases of FH in the Afrikaner population. A second mutation, a guanine to adenine base substitution in exon 9, was identified in two homozygous FH individuals. Restriction enzyme analysis of PCR-amplified DNA from blood and tissue samples now permits accurate diagnosis of these mutations.",2 4
"Sarcomere gene mutations are associated with increased cardiovascular events in left ventricular hypertrophy: results from multicenter registration in Japan. || Aged Atrial Fibrillation Death, Sudden, Cardiac Epidemiologic Methods Female Heart Failure Humans Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular Japan Male Middle Aged Mutation Prognosis Sarcomeres Tachycardia, Ventricular || This study investigated the occurrence of cardiovascular events in patients with hypertensive heart disease (HHD) or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) with or without sarcomere gene mutations. Although HHD and HCM are associated with left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), few data exist regarding the difference in prognosis between them. We enrolled 256 patients with LVH (>13 mm) screened for sarcomere gene mutations. We divided them into 3 groups: the first had HHD without sarcomere gene mutations (group H), the second had sarcomere gene mutations (group G), and the third had neither sarcomere gene mutations nor HHD (group NG). We compared the occurrence of sudden cardiac death, ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation, admission for heart failure, and atrial fibrillation for 1 year. Group G (n = 78, 36 men; mean age, 53.4 years) experienced more total cardiovascular events than group H (n = 45, 32 men; mean age, 67.4 years) (p = 0.042) after adjustments for age and sex, although there was no significant difference in total cardiovascular events between groups H and NG (n = 98, 66 men; mean age, 62.0 years). With Kaplan-Meier analysis, group G exhibited a significantly higher incidence of admission for heart failure (p = 0.017) and atrial fibrillation (p = 0.045) than group H in those 50 years of age and older. Additionally, there was a significant difference in total cardiovascular events between groups G and NG (p = 0.021). These results demonstrate that HCM with sarcomere gene mutations can be associated with increased cardiovascular events compared with HHD or HCM without sarcomere gene mutations.",4
"Variability in assigning pathogenicity to incidental findings: insights from LDLR sequence linked to the electronic health record in 1013 individuals. || Aged Databases, Genetic Electronic Health Records Female Gene Frequency Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Incidental Findings Male Middle Aged Observer Variation Polymorphism, Genetic Receptors, LDL || Knowledge of variant pathogenicity is key to implementing genomic medicine. We describe variability between expert reviewers in assigning pathogenicity to sequence variants in LDLR, the causal gene in the majority of cases of familial hypercholesterolemia. LDLR was sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq platform (average read depth >200 × ) in 1013 Mayo Biobank participants recruited from 2012 to 2013. Variants with a minor allele frequency (MAF) <5% predicted to be functional or referenced in HGMD (Human Gene Mutation Database) or NCBI-ClinVar databases were reviewed. To assign pathogenicity, variant frequency in population data sets, computational predictions, reported observations and patient-level data including electronic health record-based post hoc phenotyping were leveraged. Of 178 LDLR variants passing quality control, 25 were selected for independent review using either an in-house protocol or a disease/gene-specific semi-quantitative framework based on the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics-recommended lines of evidence. NCBI-ClinVar included interpretations for all queried variants with 74% (14/19) of variants with >1 submitter showing inconsistency in classification and 26% (5/19) appearing with conflicting clinical actionability. The discordance rate (one-step level of disagreement out of five classes in variant interpretation) between the reviewers was 40% (10/25). Two LDLR variants were independently deemed clinically actionable and returnable. Interpretation of LDLR variants was often discordant among ClinVar submitters and between expert reviewers. A quantitative approach based on strength of each predefined criterion in the context of specific genes and phenotypes may yield greater consistency between different reviewers.",4
"Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy owing to double heterozygosity for a 403Arg--> Trp mutation in exon 13 of the MYH7 gene and a novel mutation, 453Arg--> His, in exon 14 of the MYH7 gene: A case report. ||  || An unusual clinical history of a 23-year-old male proband with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated with a rare genotype is presented. Genetic analysis of the proband found evidence for two distinct mutations of the MYH7 gene (the gene coding for the beta-myosin heavy chain): 403Arg--> Trp in exon 13 and a novel mutation, 453Arg--> His, in exon 14. A heterozygous site mutation was identified in exon 13 in the proband's father but no mutation site was found in his mother. Thus, the novel mutation in exon 14 is a de novo mutation.",2 4
"Comprehensive screening of the USH2A gene in Usher syndrome type II and non-syndromic recessive retinitis pigmentosa. || Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Genetic Testing Hearing Loss Humans Male Mutation Pedigree Retinitis Pigmentosa Syndrome || A screen of the entire coding region of the USH2A gene in 129 unrelated patients with Usher syndrome type II (USH2) and in 146 unrelated patients with non-syndromic autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (ARRP) uncovered 54 different sequence variations, including 18 likely pathogenic mutations (13 frameshift, three nonsense, and two missense), 12 changes of uncertain pathogenicity (11 missense changes and one in-frame deletion), and 24 non-pathogenic rare variants or polymorphisms. Of the 18 likely pathogenic mutations, nine were novel. Among the USH2 patients, 50 (39%) had one or two likely pathogenic mutations. The most common mutant allele in USH2 patients was E767fs, which was found in 29 patients, including one homozygote. Among the ARRP patients, we found 17 (12%) with one or two likely pathogenic mutations. The most common mutant allele in ARRP patients was C759F and it was found in 10 patients. The C759F allele was also found in two USH2 patients; in neither of them was a change in the other allele found. The second most common mutant allele in both patient groups was L1447fs (found in 6/50 USH2 patients and 6/17 ARRP patients). Of the 50+17=67 patients with identified USH2A mutations, only one mutation in one allele was found in 41+12=53 (79%); the reason for the high proportion of patients with only one identified mutation is obscure. Our results indicate that USH2A mutations are found in about 7% of all cases of RP in North America, a frequency similar to the RPGR gene (8%) and the rhodopsin gene (10%).",3 1 4
"The molecular basis of familial hypercholesterolemia in The Netherlands. || Gene Frequency Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Mutation Netherlands Receptors, LDL || Mutations in the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene are responsible for familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). At present, more than 600 mutations in this gene are known to underlie FH. However, the array of mutations varies considerably in different populations. Therefore, the delineation of essentially all LDL-receptor gene mutations in a population is a prerequisite for the implementation of nation-wide genetic testing for FH. In the Netherlands, mutation analysis by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and sequencing in 1641 clinically diagnosed FH patients resulted in the characterization of 159 different LDL-receptor gene defects. The nine most common mutations were responsible for 66.5% of our FH index cases. Of these, four mutations occurred with relatively high frequencies in specific parts of the Netherlands. The remaining mutations were only encountered in single FH patients, comprising 22.2% of the patient cohort analyzed. Subsequent genetic testing of relatives of the index cases within the national FH screening program resulted in the identification of 5,531 FH patients in total. The analysis for LDL-receptor mutations is a continuing effort to update the LDL-receptor mutation catalogue. Subsequently, with the newly generated index cases, the screening program can be extended and continued to identify and treat FH patients as early as possible and reduce cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in these patients at high risk.",4
"Genetic screening of the LPL gene in hypertriglyceridaemic patients. || Adult Cholesterol Female Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genotype Humans Hypertriglyceridemia Lipoprotein Lipase Male Middle Aged Northern Ireland Polymorphism, Genetic Risk Factors Triglycerides || Serum triglyceride (TG) level is an important independent risk factor for coronary heart disease, with the lipoprotein lipase (LPL) enzyme playing the major role in regulating the catabolism of TG rich lipoproteins. The complete sequence analysis of the LPL gene was carried out on 19 individuals with extreme hypertriglyceridaemia (HTG; TG>14 mmol/l) with a total of 42 sequence variants being identified, a number of which are novel to this study. A total of eight patients were shown to have functional variants (p.D36N, p.R197H, p.N318S, p.V340I) that alter amino acids at 11 of the 16 LPL alleles. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis showed no exonic deletion or duplications in this population. Further analysis of the p.N318S (also called N291S) variant identified in the sequencing screen, in larger case and control populations, identified this mutation to be strongly associated with HTG. This study has produced a more comprehensive SNP map of LPL and its surrounding area and identified p.N318S as a major predisposing factor to HTG in the Northern Irish population.",4
"TP53 germline mutation testing in 180 families suspected of Li-Fraumeni syndrome: mutation detection rate and relative frequency of cancers in different familial phenotypes. || Adult Colonic Neoplasms DNA Mutational Analysis Family Health Female Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Middle Aged Neoplasms Netherlands Pancreatic Neoplasms Phenotype Risk Factors Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Young Adult || BACKGROUND Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome. Most families fulfilling the classical diagnostic criteria harbour TP53 germline mutations. However, TP53 germline mutations may also occur in less obvious phenotypes. As a result, different criteria are in use to decide which patients qualify for TP53 mutation analysis, including the LFS, Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) and Chompret criteria. We investigated which criteria for TP53 mutation analysis resulted in the highest mutation detection rate and sensitivity in Dutch families. We describe the tumour spectrum in TP53-positive families and calculated tumour type specific relative risks. METHOD A total of 180 Dutch families referred for TP53 mutation analysis were evaluated. Tumour phenotypes were verified by pathology reports or clinical records. RESULTS A TP53 germline mutation was identified in 24 families. When the Chompret criteria were used 22/24 mutations were detected (sensitivity 92%, mutation detection rate 21%). In LFS and LFL families 18/24 mutations were found (sensitivity 75%). The two mutations detected outside the 'Chompret group' were found in a child with rhabdomyosarcoma and a young woman with breast cancer. In the mutation carriers, in addition to the classical LFS tumour types, colon and pancreatic cancer were also found significantly more often than in the general population. CONCLUSION We suggest TP53 mutation testing for all families fulfilling the Chompret criteria. In addition, TP53 mutation testing can be considered in the event of childhood sarcoma and breast cancer before 30 years. In addition to the risk for established LFS tumour types, TP53-positive individuals may also have an elevated risk for pancreatic and colon cancer.",3 4
"Mutations in the GLA Gene and LysoGb3: Is It Really Anderson-Fabry Disease? || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Alleles Amino Acid Substitution Biomarkers Child Child, Preschool Fabry Disease Female Genotype Glycolipids Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Sphingolipids Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Anderson-Fabry disease (FD) is a rare, progressive, multisystem storage disorder caused by the partial or total deficit of the lysosomal enzyme α-galactosidase A (α-Gal A). It is an X-linked, lysosomal enzymopathy due to mutations in the galactosidase alpha gene (GLA), encoding the α-Gal A. To date, more than 900 mutations in this gene have been described. In our laboratories, the study of genetic and enzymatic alterations related to FD was performed in about 17,000 subjects with a symptomatology referable to this disorder. The accumulation of globotriaosylsphingosine (LysoGb3) was determined in blood of positives. Exonic mutations in the GLA gene were detected in 471 patients (207 Probands and 264 relatives): 71.6% of mutations were associated with the classic phenotype, 19.8% were associated with the late-onset phenotype, and 8.6% of genetic variants were of unknown significance (GVUS). The accumulation of LysoGb3 was found in all male patients with a mutation responsible for classic or late-onset FD. LysoGb3 levels were consistent with the type of mutations and the symptomatology of patients. α-Gal A activity in these patients is absent or dramatically reduced. In recent years, confusion about the pathogenicity of some mutations led to an association between non-causative mutations and FD. Our study shows that the identification of FD patients is possible by associating clinical history, GLA gene analysis, α-Gal A assay, and blood accumulation of LysoGB3. In our experience, LysoGB3 can be considered a reliable marker, which is very useful to confirm the diagnosis of Fabry disease.",3 4
"Expanding the clinical spectrum of late-onset Pompe disease: dilated arteriopathy involving the thoracic aorta, a novel vascular phenotype uncovered. || Adult Aorta, Thoracic Aortic Diseases Child, Preschool Dilatation, Pathologic Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Middle Aged Phenotype || Cerebro-vascular arteriopathy has been reported in late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD). Evidence of increased aortic stiffness in some patients and smooth muscle involvement in LOPD raises the possibility of aortic involvement. Our aim was to determine if aortic arteriopathy may be a complication of LOPD. One patient with LOPD was diagnosed with aortic dilatation at Duke Metabolic clinic, 4 others were diagnosed at University of Mainz, Germany, where chest X-ray and echocardiography are routinely done for patients. Other causes of aortic vascular disease were assessed. We report evidence of dilated arteriopathy involving primarily the ascending thoracic aorta in 5 females with late-onset Pompe disease. One patient had a bicuspid aortic valve and developed dissection. Another patient with juvenile onset disease had both thoracic and basilar artery aneurysms. Aneurysmal dilatation of the thoracic aorta is an underreported vascular complication of LOPD, probably due to the same pathological process that occurs in the brain. Chest X-ray together with echocardiography should be incorporated as initial screening tools for aortic aneurysms in patients with LOPD. When ectasia is suspected, or the ascending aorta is not visualized, contrast- mediated thoracic CT or MRA may be necessary. Large-scale studies are warranted to determine the prevalence and extent of aortic vascular involvement.",3 1 4
"PTPN11 mutations in Noonan syndrome type I: detection of recurrent mutations in exons 3 and 13. ||  || We surveyed 16 subjects with the clinical diagnosis of Noonan Syndrome (NS1) from 12 families and their relevant family members for mutations in PTPN11/SHP2 using direct DNA sequencing. We found three different mutations among five families. Two unrelated subjects shared the same de novo missense substitution in exon 13 (S502T); an additional two unrelated families had a mutation in exon 3 (Y63C); and one subject had the amino acid substitution Y62D, also in exon 3. None of the three mutations were present in ethnically matched controls. In the mature protein model, the exon 3 mutants and the exon 13 mutant amino acids cluster at the interface between the N' SH2 domain and the phosphatase catalytic domain. Six of eight subjects with PTPN11/SHP2 mutations had pulmonary valve stenosis while no mutations were identified in those subjects (N = 4) with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. An additional four subjects with possible Noonan syndrome were evaluated, but no mutations in PTPN11/SHP2 were identified. These results confirm that mutations in PTPN11/SHP2 underlie a common form of Noonan syndrome, and that the disease exhibits both allelic and locus heterogeneity. The observation of recurrent mutations supports the hypothesis that a special class of gain-of-function mutations in SHP2 give rise to Noonan syndrome.",2 4
"Thyroid pathology in PTEN-hamartoma tumor syndrome: characteristic findings of a distinct entity. || Adenocarcinoma, Follicular Adenoma Adolescent Adult Aged Carcinoma Carcinoma, Papillary Child Female Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Hyperplasia Male Middle Aged Mutation PTEN Phosphohydrolase Thyroid Cancer, Papillary Thyroid Gland Thyroid Neoplasms Thyroid Nodule Thyroiditis Young Adult || Phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome ten (PTEN)-hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS) is a complex disorder caused by germline inactivating mutations of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene. PHTS includes Cowden syndrome (CS), Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS), and Proteus-like syndromes. Affected individuals develop both benign and malignant tumors in a variety of tissues, including the thyroid. This study is to better characterize and describe the thyroid pathology within the different entities of this syndrome, and examine whether there is an association between specific thyroid findings and different PTEN mutations. Twenty patients with known PTEN mutations, and/or clinical diagnosis of PHTS, and thyroid pathology were identified: 14 with CS and 6 with BRRS. Thyroid pathology findings were as follows: multiple adenomatous nodules in a background of lymphocytic thyroiditis (LT) in 75%, papillary carcinoma in 60%, LT alone in 55%, follicular carcinoma in 45%, C-cell hyperplasia in 55%, and follicular adenomas in 25%. Within the papillary carcinoma group, there were 6 microcarcinomas, 5 follicular variants, and 1 classical type. There were no morphologic differences between the thyroid findings in CS and BRRS. Also, there was no correlation between specific PTEN germline mutations (exons 5, 6, and 8) and pathologic findings. Distinctive and characteristic findings in PHTS include multiple unique adenomatous nodules in a background of LT, and C-cell hyperplasia; it is vital that pathologists recognize the classical histologic features of this syndrome to alert clinicians to the possibility of this syndrome in their patients.",4
"Screening of SLC26A4, FOXI1, KCNJ10, and GJB2 in bilateral deafness patients with inner ear malformation. || Adolescent Adult Asian Continental Ancestry Group Child Child, Preschool China Cohort Studies Connexin 26 Connexins Deafness Ear, Inner Female Forkhead Transcription Factors Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Male Membrane Transport Proteins Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Sulfate Transporters Young Adult || Bilateral nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss associated with inner ear malformation is closely related to genetics. SLC26A4 is considered to be the major involved gene. Recently, FOXI1 and KCNJ10 mutations have been linked to enlarged vestibular aqueducts and GJB2 mutations linked to temporal bone malformation. The authors aimed to investigate the mutation spectrums of these genes in Chinese patients with bilateral hearing impairment associated with inner ear malformation. Cross-sectional study. Affiliated hospital of the university. The authors analyzed the GJB2, SLC26A4, FOXI1, and KCNJ10 gene sequences in 43 patients presenting with bilateral hearing impairment associated with inner ear malformation using pyrosequencing and direct DNA sequencing. In total, 74.4% (32/43) of patients carried at least 1 of 14 pathogenic SLC26A4 mutations, including 6 novel mutations and 4 polymorphisms. Patients with enlarged vestibular aqueducts had a higher rate of SLC26A4 mutation than Mondini dysplasia patients. No FOXI1 or KCNJ10 potential pathogenic mutation was present, and GJB2 biallelic pathogenic mutations were uncommon (2.3%; 1/43). No significant correlation was observed between the genotype and phenotype of SLC26A4 mutations. SLC26A4 accounts for 74.4% of inner ear malformations in our cohort, whereas FOXI1, KCNJ10, and GJB2 mutations are not common. Other possible genes or external factors may contribute to this multibranch abnormality.",4
"Deletion of exon 18 is a frequent mutation in glycogen storage disease type II. || Base Sequence Blotting, Southern DNA Primers Deoxyribonucleases, Type II Site-Specific Exons Gene Deletion Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Molecular Sequence Data Polymerase Chain Reaction Reference Values Repetitive Sequences, Nucleic Acid Restriction Mapping Sequence Deletion alpha-Glucosidases || An abnormal 2.3 kb SacI fragment of the human lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene (GAA) was identified in patients with glycogen storage disease type II. The fragment results from deletion of exon 18 and adjacent parts of intron 17 and 18. The borders of the deletion are marked by the occurrence of an eight nucleotide long tandem repeat (AGGGGCCG) which is apparently instrumental in the mutation event. The exon 18 deletion was demonstrated in 10 out of 39 patients from Europe (all hetero-allelic) and is so far the most common mutation in this disease (allele frequency among patients is 0.13).",4
"Clinical and molecular aspects of 30 patients with late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD): unusual features and response to treatment. || Adult Analysis of Variance Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Magnetic Resonance Imaging Male Middle Aged Muscle, Skeletal Mutation Respiration Disorders Severity of Illness Index Ureohydrolases Young Adult alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is a rare metabolic disorder, due to mutations in the gene encoding acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA), of which infantile and late-onset forms may occur. Aim of the work was to analyze clinical and laboratory data of a cohort of late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) patients, collected during the last 15 years and to point out unusual phenotypic/genotypic features as well as enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) responses. We diagnosed 30 LOPD patients; at follow-up, they underwent motor, respiratory, cardiac and muscle MRI evaluations. Motor performances were tested by Walton Gardner-Medwin, GSGC and 6MWT tests. Respiratory function was assessed as FVC% in upright/supine position. LOPD presentations were represented by presymptomatic hyperCKemia (37%), proximal/axial muscle weakness (53%) and respiratory impairment (10%). Median diagnostic delay was 8.6 years (± 8.8). Atypical features were observed in 4 patients: marked distal muscle weakness and severe hearing loss at onset, as well as leukoencephalopathy and mesial temporal sclerosis during the disease course. By GAA sequence analysis, two causing mutations were detected in 22/30 patients, only one in the remaining 8 subjects. Overall, 29/30 patients harbored the common c.-32-13T>G mutation (2 were homozygous). Two new DNA variations were discovered (c.2395C>G, c.1771C>T). 14 patients received ERT for up to 60 months. Our study confirms LOPD clinical and genetic heterogeneity: atypical features may contribute to expand the clinical phenotype highlighting its multi-systemic nature. A timely diagnosis could allow early ERT start. An accurate follow-up is recommended to evaluate treatment responses.",3 4
"Sequence variations in PCSK9, low LDL, and protection against coronary heart disease. || African Continental Ancestry Group Carotid Arteries Cholesterol, LDL Codon, Nonsense Cohort Studies Coronary Disease European Continental Ancestry Group Female Gene Frequency Genetic Variation Genotype Humans Hypolipoproteinemias Incidence Male Middle Aged Proportional Hazards Models Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Risk Serine Endopeptidases United States || A low plasma level of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol is associated with reduced risk of coronary heart disease (CHD), but the effect of lifelong reductions in plasma LDL cholesterol is not known. We examined the effect of DNA-sequence variations that reduce plasma levels of LDL cholesterol on the incidence of coronary events in a large population. We compared the incidence of CHD (myocardial infarction, fatal CHD, or coronary revascularization) over a 15-year interval in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study according to the presence or absence of sequence variants in the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 serine protease gene (PCSK9) that are associated with reduced plasma levels of LDL cholesterol. Of the 3363 black subjects examined, 2.6 percent had nonsense mutations in PCSK9; these mutations were associated with a 28 percent reduction in mean LDL cholesterol and an 88 percent reduction in the risk of CHD (P=0.008 for the reduction; hazard ratio, 0.11; 95 percent confidence interval, 0.02 to 0.81; P=0.03). Of the 9524 white subjects examined, 3.2 percent had a sequence variation in PCSK9 that was associated with a 15 percent reduction in LDL cholesterol and a 47 percent reduction in the risk of CHD (hazard ratio, 0.50; 95 percent confidence interval, 0.32 to 0.79; P=0.003). These data indicate that moderate lifelong reduction in the plasma level of LDL cholesterol is associated with a substantial reduction in the incidence of coronary events, even in populations with a high prevalence of non-lipid-related cardiovascular risk factors.",4
"Cleft lip/palate and CDH1/E-cadherin mutations in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. || Adult Cadherins Cleft Lip Cleft Palate DNA Mutational Analysis Gene Expression Profiling Humans Mutation Pedigree Stomach Neoplasms || We report the association of CDH1/E-cadherin mutations with cleft lip, with or without cleft palate (CLP), in two families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). In each family, the CDH1 mutation was a splicing mutation generating aberrant transcripts with an in-frame deletion, removing the extracellular cadherin repeat domains involved in cell-cell adhesion. Such transcripts might encode mutant proteins with trans-dominant negative effects. We found that CDH1 is highly expressed at 4 and 5 weeks in the frontonasal prominence, and at 6 weeks in the lateral and medial nasal prominences of human embryos, and is therefore expressed during the critical stages of lip and palate development. These findings suggest that alteration of the E-cadherin pathway can contribute to human clefting.",3 4 0
"Clinical aspects of Usher syndrome and the USH2A gene in a cohort of 433 patients. ||  || A new statistical approach is needed to describe the clinical differences between type I and type II Usher syndrome and between the 2 most frequent mutations in the USH2A gene. To describe the primary phenotypic characteristics and differences between type I and type II Usher syndrome and to establish a phenotype-genotype correlation for the 2 most frequent mutations in the USH2A gene. Cross-sectional study at a genetics department, in which clinical evaluations were performed for 433 patients (297 unrelated families) who were classified as having type I, II, III, atypical, or unclassified Usher syndrome according to their clinical history, pedigree data, results from ophthalmological studies, and audiological, neurophysiological, and vestibular test results. Molecular studies were performed for 304 patients (256 unrelated families). The Mann-Whitney U test or the χ2 test was used for calculating the differences between mean values for the analyzed parameters. Age at diagnosis; age at onset of night blindness, visual field loss, visual acuity loss, and cataracts; and severity and age at diagnosis of hearing loss. The comparison between patients with type I Usher syndrome and those with type II Usher syndrome revealed P < .001 for most items analyzed. The most frequent mutations in the USH2A gene were the p.Glu767Serfs*21 and p.Cys759Phe mutations, with an allelic frequency of 23.2% (63 of 272 alleles) and 8.1% (22 of 272 alleles), respectively. The phenotypic analysis for patients carrying p.Cys759Phe showed P < .001 for most items analyzed when compared with patients carrying p.Glu767Serfs*21 and when compared with patients carrying other mutations in the USH2A gene. None of the p.Cys759Phe patients exhibited a severe hearing loss phenotype, and more than 60% had only mild hearing loss. Most patients carrying the p.Glu767Serfs*21 mutation (72.1%) were moderately deaf. Our study presents the clinical differences between type I and type II Usher syndrome and between the 2 most frequent mutations in the USH2A gene. Detailed genotype-phenotype correlations, as presented in our study, allow for a better correlation of clinical signs with a known genotype and can improve the clinical management, genetic counseling, and risk assessment of patients with Usher syndrome because an estimated prognosis of their disease can be made.",4
Germline mutation of the tumour suppressor PTEN in Proteus syndrome. || DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Male PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Proteus Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Proteins || ,3 4
"Identification and molecular characterization of a novel 3&#x2032; mutation in RUNX1 in a family with familial platelet disorder. || Acute Disease Base Sequence Blood Platelet Disorders Codon, Nonsense Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Family Health Female Germ-Line Mutation Humans Leukemia, Myeloid Male Mutation Pedigree || ",4 0
"Molecular genetic testing of patients with monogenic diabetes and hyperinsulinism. || Child Diabetes Mellitus Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Genetic Testing Humans Hyperinsulinism Infant, Newborn Insulin-Secreting Cells Male Mosaicism Mutation Phenotype Sequence Analysis, DNA Time Factors || Genetic sequencing has become a critical part of the diagnosis of certain forms of pancreatic beta cell dysfunction. Despite great advances in the speed and cost of DNA sequencing, determining the pathogenicity of variants remains a challenge, and requires sharing of sequence and phenotypic data between laboratories. We reviewed all diabetes and hyperinsulinism-associated molecular testing done at the Seattle Children's Molecular Genetics Laboratory from 2009 to 2013. 331 probands were referred to us for molecular genetic sequencing for Neonatal Diabetes (NDM), Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY), or Congenital Hyperinsulinism (CHI) during this period. Reportable variants were identified in 115 (35%) patients with 91 variants in one of 6 genes: HNF1A, GCK, HNF4A, ABCC8, KCNJ11, or INS. In addition to identifying 23 novel variants, we identified unusual mechanisms of inheritance, including mosaic and digenic MODY presentations. Re-analysis of all reported variants using more recently available databases led to a change in variant interpretation from the original report in 30% of cases. These results represent a resource for molecular testing of monogenic forms of diabetes and hyperinsulinism, providing a mutation spectrum for these disorders in a large North American cohort. In addition, they highlight the importance of periodic review of molecular testing results.",4
"Characterization of cryptic splicing in germline PTEN intronic variants in Cowden syndrome. || Adolescent Adult Aged Alternative Splicing Child Child, Preschool Female Gene Expression Regulation Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans MAP Kinase Signaling System Male Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pathology, Molecular Protein Isoforms Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt RNA Splice Sites Young Adult || Germline mutations in the tumor-suppressor gene PTEN predispose to subsets of Cowden syndrome (CS), Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, and autism. Evidence-based classification of PTEN variants as either deleterious or benign is urgently needed for accurate molecular diagnosis and gene-informed genetic counseling. We studied 34 different germline PTEN intronic variants from 61 CS patients, characterized their PTEN mRNA processing, and analyzed PTEN expression and downstream readouts of P-AKT and P-ERK1/2. While we found that many mutations near splice junctions result in exon skipping, we also identified the presence of cryptic splicing that resulted in premature termination or a shift in isoform usage. PTEN protein expression is significantly lower in the group with splicing changes while P-AKT, but not P-ERK1/2, is significantly increased. Our observations of these PTEN intronic variants should contribute to the determination of pathogenicity of PTEN intronic variants and aid in genetic counseling.",2 4 0 3
"Novel mechanism of a CDH1 splicing mutation in a Korean patient with signet ring cell carcinoma. ||  || We report a novel mechanism of a CDH1 splicing mutation in a patient with signet ring cell carcinoma of the stomach. A 27-year-old man complaining of aggravated dyspepsia was diagnosed with signet ring cell carcinoma. Both his father and uncle had died of stomach cancer at a young age. DNA sequencing analysis of the CDH1 gene revealed a splice site mutation(c.833-2A>G). By RNA/cDNA sequencing analysis, CDH1 c.833-2A>G generated a new acceptor site within intron 6, causing the insertion of a 79-bp intronic sequence between exon 6 and 7 (r.833-79_833-1ins), and resulting in a frame shift. E-cadherin immunohistochemical staining revealed a loss of CDH1 expression. This study reveals the disease-causing mechanism of this splicing mutation, and emphasizes the need for functional studies using RNA samples for the accurate interpretation of detected splicing variant. This is the first reported case of a CDH1 mutation in a Korean patient.",4 0
"Mutations of PTEN in patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba phenotype. || Adolescent Adult Child Exons Female Genes, Tumor Suppressor Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary PTEN Phosphohydrolase Pedigree Phenotype Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Pigmentation Disorders Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Proteins || We report three new mutations in PTEN, the gene responsible for Cowden disease in five patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome from three unrelated families. This finding confirms that Cowden disease, a dominant cancer predisposing syndrome, and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, which includes macrocephaly, multiple lipomas, intestinal hamartomatous polyps, vascular malformations, and pigmented macules of the penis, are allelic disorders at the PTEN locus on chromosome 10q.",2 4 3
A multicenter clinical exome study in unselected cohorts from a consanguineous population of Saudi Arabia demonstrated a high diagnostic yield. || Adolescent Adult Child Cohort Studies Consanguinity Exome Female Humans Male Molecular Diagnostic Techniques Pedigree Saudi Arabia || ,4
"Patients with Obesity Caused by Melanocortin-4 Receptor Mutations Can Be Treated with a Glucagon-like Peptide-1 Receptor Agonist. ||  || Pathogenic mutations in the appetite-regulating melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) represent the most common cause of monogenic obesity with limited treatment options. Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) cause weight loss by reducing appetite. We assessed the effect of the GLP-1 RA liraglutide 3.0 mg for 16 weeks in 14 obese individuals with pathogenic MC4R mutations (BMI 37.5 ± 6.8) and 28 matched control participants without MC4R mutation (BMI 36.8 ± 4.8). Liraglutide decreased body weight by 6.8 kg ± 1.8 kg in individuals with pathogenic MC4R mutations and by 6.1 kg ± 1.2 kg in control participants. Total body fat, waist circumference, and fasting and postprandial glucose concentrations similarly decreased in both groups. Thus, liraglutide induced an equal, clinically significant weight loss of 6% in both groups, indicating that the appetite-reducing effect of liraglutide is preserved in MC4R causal obesity and that liraglutide acts independently of the MC4R pathway. Thus, liraglutide could be an effective treatment of the most common form of monogenic obesity.",2 4
"Prevalence and diversity of constitutional mutations in the p53 gene among 21 Li-Fraumeni families. || Base Sequence Child Codon Exons Family Health Female Genes, p53 Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Prevalence || The entire coding sequence of the p53 gene was analysed for the presence of mutations in 12 families conforming to a restricted definition of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (classic LFS) and nine families with features of LFS conforming to a broader definition. Mutations were detected in seven families. Six were point mutations with one each affecting codons 175, 180, and 220 and three affecting codon 248. The seventh was a deletion/insertion mutation in exon 4. Germline mutations in p53 were a feature of families which included children with rhabdomyosarcoma and/or adrenal cortical carcinoma. Germline p53 mutations were detected in six of the nine families with such tumors. An analysis of these 7 mutations, together with 34 published examples, showed that more than one-half were transitions at CpG dinucleotides, suggesting that the majority of germline p53 mutations may arise as a result of spontaneous events. The most common cancers occurring in the 41 families with germline p53 mutations, in common with classic LFS, were bone and soft tissue sarcoma, breast cancer, brain tumors, leukemia, and adrenocortical carcinoma, although less than one-half of the probands with germline p53 mutations came from classic LFS families. More than one-half of the cancers overall and nearly one-third of the breast cancers were diagnosed before 30 years of age. These observations have important implications for asymptomatic carriers of germline p53 mutations, and there is a need for international collaboration in the development of protocols for the management of such families.",2 4 3
"Somatic Mutations in the MTOR gene cause focal cortical dysplasia type IIb. || Adolescent Adult Brain Child Female HEK293 Cells Humans Male Malformations of Cortical Development Malformations of Cortical Development, Group II Mutation TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases || Focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) type IIb is a cortical malformation characterized by cortical architectural abnormalities, dysmorphic neurons, and balloon cells. It has been suggested that FCDs are caused by somatic mutations in cells in the developing brain. Here, we explore the possible involvement of somatic mutations in FCD type IIb. We collected a total of 24 blood-brain paired samples with FCD, including 13 individuals with FCD type IIb, 5 with type IIa, and 6 with type I. We performed whole-exome sequencing using paired samples from 9 of the FCD type IIb subjects. Somatic MTOR mutations were identified and further investigated using all 24 paired samples by deep sequencing of the entire gene's coding region. Somatic MTOR mutations were confirmed by droplet digital polymerase chain reaction. The effect of MTOR mutations on mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) kinase signaling was evaluated by immunohistochemistry and Western blotting analyses of brain samples and by in vitro transfection experiments. We identified four lesion-specific somatic MTOR mutations in 6 of 13 (46%) individuals with FCD type IIb showing mutant allele rates of 1.11% to 9.31%. Functional analyses showed that phosphorylation of ribosomal protein S6 in FCD type IIb brain tissues with MTOR mutations was clearly elevated, compared to control samples. Transfection of any of the four MTOR mutants into HEK293T cells led to elevated phosphorylation of 4EBP, the direct target of mTOR kinase. We found low-prevalence somatic mutations in MTOR in FCD type IIb, indicating that activating somatic mutations in MTOR cause FCD type IIb.",4
"DNA Diagnostics of Hereditary Hearing Loss: A Targeted Resequencing Approach Combined with a Mutation Classification System. || Connexins DNA Copy Number Variations Exome GPI-Linked Proteins Genetic Predisposition to Disease Hearing Loss, Sensorineural High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans INDEL Mutation Membrane Proteins Mutation Myosins Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Sequence Analysis, DNA || Although there are nearly 100 different causative genes identified for nonsyndromic hearing loss (NSHL), Sanger sequencing-based DNA diagnostics usually only analyses three, namely, GJB2, SLC26A4, and OTOF. As this is seen as inadequate, there is a need for high-throughput diagnostic methods to detect disease-causing variations, including single-nucleotide variations (SNVs), insertions/deletions (Indels), and copy-number variations (CNVs). In this study, a targeted resequencing panel for hearing loss was developed including 79 genes for NSHL and selected forms of syndromic hearing loss. One-hundred thirty one presumed autosomal-recessive NSHL (arNSHL) patients of Western-European ethnicity were analyzed for SNVs, Indels, and CNVs. In addition, we established a straightforward variant classification system to deal with the large number of variants encountered. We estimate that combining prescreening of GJB2 with our panel leads to a diagnosis in 25%-30% of patients. Our data show that after GJB2, the most commonly mutated genes in a Western-European population are TMC1, MYO15A, and MYO7A (3.1%). CNV analysis resulted in the identification of causative variants in two patients in OTOA and STRC. One of the major challenges for diagnostic gene panels is assigning pathogenicity for variants. A collaborative database collecting all identified variants from multiple centers could be a valuable resource for hearing loss diagnostics.",4
"Beta-myosin heavy chain gene mutations and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in Austrian children. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Amino Acid Substitution Austria Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Child, Preschool Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 DNA Mutational Analysis Death, Sudden, Cardiac Electrocardiography Female Genes, Dominant Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Infant Male Mutation, Missense Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Point Mutation || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy occurs in two variants, either as an autosomal dominant familial disorder or as a sporadic disease without familial involvement. Different genes coding sarcomeric proteins of the heart have been identified as causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Missense mutations in the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene are found in 30% of all cases of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. We screened the beta-myosin heavy chain gene of children of nine Austrian families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (referred to as group A) and of seven children with sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (referred to as group B). We were able to find two previously described (V606M, R453C) and two unknown missense mutations (V406M, R663H) in group A. Additionally, in two children of group B we could identify one already known missense mutation, R249Q as well as one previously unknown missense mutation, M877K. The genetically affected children of group A developed no or only mild clinical symptoms, whereas the children of group B with genetically confirmed sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy showed manifest left ventricular hypertrophy and clinical symptoms including chest pain and dyspnoea. Clinical symptoms among the adults of group A, suffering from familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, varied significantly. We therefore believe V406M to be a more malignant missense mutation, probably linked with sudden death in the affected family, than R663H, which seems to be more benign causing late-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and mild clinical symptoms in the affected family members.",2 4
"Identification and characterization of melanocortin-4 receptor gene mutations in morbidly obese finnish children and adults. || Adolescent Adult Cell Line Child Cohort Studies Female Finland Heterozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Obesity, Morbid Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Signal Transduction Tissue Distribution || Two Finnish cohorts, comprising 56 children with severe early-onset obesity (relative weight for height greater than or equal to +70% before age 10) and 252 morbidly obese adults (body mass index, > or = 40 kg/m(2)), were screened for melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) mutations. We identified a pathogenic mutation (S127L) in one child, causing severe early-onset obesity. We describe the phenotype of this particular mutation for the first time. We also identified a novel (I226T) polymorphism in the coding and two new variations (-439delGC and 1059C>T) outside the coding region of the MC4R gene. Three previously described polymorphisms (V103I, T112M, and I125L) were identified. In vitro functional studies of variants T112M, S127L, and I226T supported a pathogenic role of the S127L mutation, because signaling properties of the receptor in response to the MC4R agonists alpha-MSH, beta-MSH, and gamma(1)-MSH were impaired. The S127L mutation did not affect receptor inhibition by the antagonist agouti-related protein. Localization of the three variant receptors was similar to that of wild type. In conclusion, a pathogenic MC4R mutation was found among subjects with severe early-onset obesity but not among morbidly obese adults. Impaired function of the S127L receptor was due to reduced activation, not a defect of protein transport to the cell membrane.",2 4 0
"Diagnostic screening of MODY2/GCK mutations in the Norwegian MODY Registry. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Glucokinase Humans Male Norway Pedigree Prevalence Registries || Maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 2 (MODY2) is caused by mutations in the glucokinase gene (GCK). The aim of our study was to determine the prevalence of GCK mutations in the Norwegian MODY Registry and to delineate the clinical phenotype of identified GCK mutation carriers. We screened 122 probands referred to the MODY Registry for mutations in GCK and studied extended families with MODY2. We found 2 novel (S76Y and N231S) and 13 previously reported (V62A, G72R, L146R, R191W, A208T, M210K, Y215X, M235T, R275C, E339G, R377C, S453L, and IVS5+1G>C) GCK mutations in 23 probands and in their 33 family members. The prevalence of MODY2 was 12% in the Norwegian MODY Registry. The subjects with GCK mutations had features of mild diabetes. Yet, 15 of 56 MODY2 subjects were treated with oral drugs or insulin. Three subjects had retinopathy and one had macrovascular disease. Also, a limited number of cases had elevated fasting serum triglyceride values. Moreover, two GCK mutation carriers were diagnosed with type 1 diabetes. According to our diagnostic screening of GCK in the MODY Registry, MODY2 is less prevalent than MODY3 in Norway but is likely to be underreported. Recognizing MODY2 in diabetic patients is important in order to prevent overtreatment. Finally, our study demonstrates the co-occurrence of MODY2 in families with type 1 or type 2 diabetes.",4
"Associations of CDH1 germline variant location and cancer phenotype in families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). ||  || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is a cancer syndrome associated with variants in E-cadherin (CDH1), diffuse gastric cancer and lobular breast cancer. There is considerable heterogeneity in its clinical manifestations. This study aimed to determine associations between CDH1 germline variant status and clinical phenotypes of HDGC. One hundred and fifty-two HDGC families, including six previously unreported families, were identified. CDH1 gene-specific guidelines released by the Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen) CDH1 Variant Curation Expert Panel were applied for pathogenicity classification of truncating, missense and splice site CDH1 germline variants. We evaluated ORs between location of truncating variants of CDH1 and incidence of colorectal cancer, breast cancer and cancer at young age (gastric cancer at <40 or breast cancer <50 years of age). Frequency of truncating germline CDH1 variants varied across functional domains of the E-cadherin receptor gene and was highest in linker (0.05785 counts/base pair; p=0.0111) and PRE regions (0.10000; p=0.0059). Families with truncating CDH1 germline variants located in the PRE-PRO region were six times more likely to have family members affected by colorectal cancer (OR 6.20, 95% CI 1.79 to 21.48; p=0.004) compared with germline variants in other regions. Variants in the intracellular E-cadherin region were protective for cancer at young age (OR 0.2, 95% CI 0.06 to 0.64; p=0.0071) and in the linker regions for breast cancer (OR 0.35, 95% CI 0.12 to 0.99; p=0.0493). Different CDH1 genotypes were associated with different intracellular signalling activation levels including different p-ERK, p-mTOR and β-catenin levels in early submucosal T1a lesions of HDGC families with different CDH1 variants. Type and location of CDH1 germline variants may help to identify families at increased risk for concomitant cancers that might benefit from individualised surveillance and intervention strategies.",4
"Familial gastric cancer - aetiology and pathogenesis. || Genes, Neoplasm Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Risk Factors Stomach Neoplasms || Gastric cancer is the second most common cause of cancer death worldwide. It is estimated that 5-10% of gastric cancer cases have a familial association; however, knowledge concerning the genetic predisposition to familial gastric cancer is currently limited. In this chapter we discuss what is known about the aetiology and pathogenesis of both the diffuse and intestinal forms of familial gastric cancer. We focus particularly on hereditary diffuse gastric cancer because the discovery of germ-line E-cadherin mutations in a number of affected families has opened the prospect of identifying gene carriers, with implications for clinical management. The interplay of other conventional risk factors, such as Helicobacter pylori infection, with genetic factors is also discussed. It is hoped that understanding the genetic basis for familial gastric cancer will facilitate the development of clinically useful screening and preventative procedures.",4
"Mutation screening in dilated cardiomyopathy: prominent role of the beta myosin heavy chain gene. || Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Child Female Genetic Testing Genotype Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Polymorphism, Genetic || Familial dilated cardiomyopathy (FDCM) is associated with mutations in more than 10 genes, but genes mutation frequencies and associated clinical features remain largely unknown. Here, we performed a mutation analysis of four genes involved in FDCM in a population of idiopathic DCM. A SSCP and sequencing mutation screening of all the exons coding for beta myosin heavy chain (MYH7 gene), cardiac T troponin (TNNT2 gene), phospholamban (PLN gene), and the cardio-specific exon of metavinculin (VCL gene) were performed in 96 independent patients (54 familial and 42 sporadic). It led to the identification of eight heterozygous mutations, seven new ones in MYH7, and the already described R141W mutation in TNNT2. MYH7 mutations (in five familial and two sporadic cases) substitute residues located either in the head (I201T, T412N, A550V) or tail domains (T1019N, R1193S, E1426K, R1634S) of the protein. DCM was not associated with skeletal myopathy or conduction defects in any patients. Contrasting clinical features were observed between MYH7 and TNNT2 mutations carriers. In MYH7 vs. TNNT2, mean age at diagnosis was late (P<0.03), penetrance was incomplete in adults (56 vs. 100%), and mean age at major cardiac event was higher (P<0.04). We have identified seven mutations in MYH7, one in TNNT2, and none in PLN or in the VCL cardio-specific exon. MYH7 appears as the most frequently mutated gene in our FDCM population (approximately 10%), and mutation carriers present with delayed onset, in contrast to TNNT2.",4
"Targeted DNA Sequencing from Autism Spectrum Disorder Brains Implicates Multiple Genetic Mechanisms. || Adolescent Autism Spectrum Disorder Brain Child DNA-Binding Proteins Female Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation NAV1.1 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel NAV1.2 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Sequence Analysis, DNA Transcription Factors || Single nucleotide variants (SNVs), particularly loss-of-function mutations, are significant contributors to autism spectrum disorder (ASD) risk. Here we report the first systematic deep sequencing study of 55 postmortem ASD brains for SNVs in 78 known ASD candidate genes. Remarkably, even without parental samples, we find more ASD brains with mutations that are protein-altering (26/55 cases versus 12/50 controls, p = 0.015), deleterious (16/55 versus 5/50, p = 0.016), or loss-of-function (6/55 versus 0/50, p = 0.028) compared to controls, with recurrent deleterious mutations in ARID1B, SCN1A, SCN2A, and SETD2, suggesting these mutations contribute to ASD risk. In several cases, the identified mutations and medical records suggest syndromic ASD diagnoses. Two ASD and one Fragile X premutation case showed deleterious somatic mutations, providing evidence that somatic mutations occur in ASD cases, and supporting a model in which a combination of germline and/or somatic mutations may contribute to ASD risk on a case-by-case basis.",4
"Clinical and metabolic features of adult-onset diabetes caused by ABCC8 mutations. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Adolescent Adult Diabetes Mellitus Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Humans Hypoglycemic Agents Insulin Male Mutation Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Receptors, Drug Sulfonylurea Compounds Sulfonylurea Receptors Young Adult || Gain-of-function ABCC8/sulfonylurea (SU) receptor 1 mutations cause neonatal diabetes mellitus (NDM) or late-onset diabetes in adult relatives. Given the effectiveness of SU treatment in ABCC8-NDM patients, we further characterized late-onset ABCC8-associated diabetes. Seven adult subjects from three NDM families and one family with type 2 diabetes were studied. Insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity were assessed using clamp techniques. We screened 139 type 2 diabetic patients who were well controlled by SU for ABCC8 mutations. ABCC8 mutation carriers exhibited glucose intolerance, frank diabetes, or insulin-requiring diabetes since diagnosis. HbA(1c) improved in five SU-treated patients. Insulin secretion capacity was impaired in three patients compared with adult control subjects but was restored after a 4-week SU trial in two patients. Cohort screening revealed four SU-treated patients with ABCC8 mutations, two of which are likely causal. Although of rare occurrence, recognition of adult-onset ABCC8-associated diabetes may help in targeting patients for SU therapy.",2 4
"Systematic analysis of variants related to familial hypercholesterolemia in families with premature myocardial infarction. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adult Aged Cholesterol, LDL Coronary Artery Disease Europe Exome Female Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Myocardial Infarction Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Risk Factors Serine Endopeptidases || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an oligogenic disorder characterized by markedly elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDLC) levels. Variants in four genes have been reported to cause the classical autosomal-dominant form of the disease. FH is largely under-diagnosed in European countries. As FH increases the risk for coronary artery disease (CAD) and myocardial infarction (MI), it might be specifically overlooked in the large number of such patients. Here, we systematically examined the frequency of potential FH-causing variants by exome sequencing in 255 German patients with premature MI and a positive family history for CAD. We further performed co-segregation analyses in an average of 5.5 family members per MI patient. In total, we identified 11 potential disease-causing variants that co-segregate within the families, that is, 5% of patients with premature MI and positive CAD family history had FH. Eight variants were previously reported as disease-causing and three are novel (LDLR.c.811G>A p.(V271I)), PCSK9.c.610G>A (p.(D204N)) and STAP1.c.139A>G (p.(T47A))). Co-segregation analyses identified multiple additional family members carrying one of these FH variants and the clinical phenotype of either FH (n=2) or FH and premature CAD (n=15). However, exome sequencing also revealed that some variants in FH genes, which have been reported to cause FH, do not co-segregate with FH. The data reveal that a large proportion of FH patients escape the diagnosis, even when they have premature MI. Hence, systematic molecular-genetic screening for FH in such patients may reveal a substantial number of cases and thereby allow a timely LDLC-lowering in both FH/MI patients as well as their variant-carrying family members.",2 4
"[Analysis of MYH7, MYBPC3 and TNNT2 gene mutations in 10 Chinese pedigrees with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and the correlation between genotype and phenotype]. ||  || The aim of this study was to screen the disease-causing gene mutations and investigate the genotype-phenotype correlation in 10 Chinese pedigrees with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). There are 91 family members from these 10 pedigrees and 5 members were normal mutated carriers, 23 members were HCM patients (14 male) aged from 1.5 to 73 years old. The functional regions of myosin heavy chain gene (MYH7), cardiac myosin-binding protein C (MYBPC3) and cardiac troponin T gene (TNNT2) were screened with PCR and direct sequencing technique. Clinical information from all patients was also evaluated in regard to the genotype. Mutations were found in 5 out of 10 pedigrees. Mutations in MYH7 (Arg663His, Glu924Lys and Ile736Thr) were found in 3 pedigrees and 3 patients from these pedigrees suffered sudden death at age 20-48 years old during sport. Mutations in MYBPC3 were found in 2 pedigrees, 1 with complex mutation (Arg502Trp and splicing mutation IVS27 + 12C > T) and 1 with novel frame shift mutation (Gly347fs) and the latter pedigree has sudden death history. No mutation was identified in TNNT2. Although the Han Chinese is a relatively homogeneous ethnic group, different HCM gene mutations were responsible for familiar HCM suggesting the heterogeneity nature of the disease-causing genes and HCM MYH7 mutations are associated with a higher risk of sudden death in this cohort. Furthermore, identical mutation might result in different phenotypes suggesting that multiple factors might be involved in the pathogenesis of familiar HCM.",4
"A prospective study of total gastrectomy for CDH1-positive hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. || Adolescent Adult Aged Antigens, CD Cadherins Carcinoma, Signet Ring Cell Female Follow-Up Studies Gastrectomy Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Prognosis Prospective Studies Stomach Neoplasms Survival Rate Young Adult || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is an autosomal dominant cancer syndrome. Up to 30% of families with HDGC have mutations in the E-cadherin gene, CDH1. The role of prophylactic versus therapeutic gastrectomy for HDGC was studied prospectively. Eighteen consecutive patients with CDH1 mutations and positive family history were studied prospectively, including 13 without and 5 with symptoms. Proportions were compared by Fisher's exact test, and survival by the Breslow modification of the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Each patient underwent total gastrectomy (TG), and 17 (94%) were found to have signet ring cell adenocarcinoma. Twelve of 13 asymptomatic patients had T1, N0 cancer, and only 2/12 (16%) had it diagnosed preoperatively despite state-of-the-art screening methods. Each asymptomatic patient did well postoperatively, and no patient has recurred. For five symptomatic patients, each (100%) was found to have signet ring cell adenocarcinoma (P = 0.002 versus asymptomatic) by preoperative endoscopy; three (60%) had lymph node involvement and two (40%) had distant metastases at time of operation. Two-year survival was 100% for asymptomatic and 40% for symptomatic patients (P < 0.01). The data show that asymptomatic patients with family history of HDGC and CDH1 mutation have high probability of having signet ring cell adenocarcinoma of the stomach that is not able to be diagnosed on endoscopy; when symptoms arise, the diagnosis can be made by endoscopy, but they have metastases and decreased survival. Surveillance endoscopy is of limited value, and prophylactic gastrectomy (PG) is recommended for patients with family history of HDGC and CDH1 mutations.",4
"Prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in HER2+ breast cancer patients. || Adult Breast Neoplasms DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genes, erbB-2 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Middle Aged Multiplex Polymerase Chain Reaction Prevalence Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 Young Adult || Breast cancer is the most frequent tumor in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a rare inherited cancer syndrome associated with germline mutations in the TP53 gene. Recent data show that breast cancer in germline TP53 mutation carriers is commonly HER2+ (63-83 %). We assessed the prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in a cohort of women with HER2+ breast cancer diagnosed age ≤50 years. We identified blood specimens from 213 women with primary invasive HER2+ breast cancer age ≤50 years from a single center. Exon grouping analysis sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification techniques were used to screen for germline TP53 mutations. Among 213 women with HER2+ breast cancer age ≤50 years, 3 (ages at diagnosis 23, 32, 44 years) were found to carry a TP53 mutation (1.4 %, 95 % CI 0.3-4.1 %). ER/PR status was not uniform. Two TP53 carriers met Chompret criteria for LFS; none met classic LFS criteria. Although two-thirds of breast cancers in women with TP53 mutations are HER2+, we observed a low prevalence of germline TP53 mutations among unselected young women with HER2+ breast cancer. Given the potential clinical impact, consideration of germline TP53 testing should be given to young women with HER2+ breast cancer, especially if family cancer history is notable.",3 4
"Younger age of cancer initiation is associated with shorter telomere length in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. || Adolescent Adult Age Factors Child Child, Preschool Female Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Lymphocytes Male Middle Aged Neoplasms Pedigree Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Telomere || Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a cancer predisposition syndrome frequently associated with germ line TP53 mutations. Unpredictable and disparate age of cancer onset is a major challenge in the management of LFS. Genetic modifiers, including the MDM2-SNP309 polymorphism, and genetic anticipation have been suggested as plausible explanations for young age of tumor onset, but the molecular mechanisms for these observations are unknown. We speculated that telomere attrition will increase genomic instability and cause earlier tumor onset in successive generations. We analyzed mean telomere length and MDM2-SNP309 polymorphism status in individuals from multiple LFS families and controls. A total of 45 peripheral blood lymphocyte samples were analyzed from 9 LFS families and 15 controls. High rate of MDM2-SNP309 was found in TP53 carriers (P = 0.0003). In children, telomere length was shorter in carriers affected with cancer than in nonaffected carriers and wild-type controls (P < 0.0001). The same pattern was seen in adults (P = 0.002). Within each family, telomere length was shorter in children with cancer than in their nonaffected siblings and their noncarrier parents. Telomere attrition between children and adults was faster in carriers than in controls. Our results support the role of MDM2-SNP309 as a genetic modifier in LFS. The novel finding of accelerated telomere attrition in LFS suggests that telomere length could explain earlier age of onset in successive generations of the same family with identical TP53/MDM2-SNP309 genotypes. Furthermore, telomere shortening could predict genetic anticipation observed in LFS and may serve as the first rational biological marker for clinical monitoring of these patients.",2 4
"Fabry or not Fabry--a question of ascertainment. || Fabry Disease Heterozygote Humans Mutation, Missense alpha-Galactosidase || ",2 4 3
"Mutation analysis in a small cohort of New Zealand patients originating from the United Kingdom demonstrates genetic heterogeneity in familial hypercholesterolemia. || Adult Aged Apolipoproteins B DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Heterogeneity Genetic Linkage Haplotypes Heterozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged New Zealand Pedigree Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Receptors, LDL United Kingdom || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) and familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 (FDB) are relatively common lipid disorders caused by mutations in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and apolipoprotein B (apo B) genes, respectively. Molecular analysis at these loci was performed in eight New Zealand subjects with clinical features of heterozygous FH. Utilization of an in vitro lymphocyte receptor assay demonstrated normal receptor function in four patients, three of whom screened positive for the founder-type apo B mutation, R3500Q, causing FDB. Four patients with reduced LDLR function, consistent with heterozygous FH, revealed three previously documented mutations in exons 3 (W66X), 6 (C292Y) and 7 (G322S) of the LDLR gene and, a novel 2-bp deletion (TC or CT) after nucleotide 1204 (or 1205) in exon 9. The remaining patient was found to be FH/FDB negative after extensive mutation screening using both denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and heteroduplex-single strand conformation polymorphism analysis. Haplotype analysis at the LDLR and apo B loci finally excluded the likelihood that mutations in these two genes underlie the FH phenotype in the molecularly uncharacterized New Zealand family originating from the United Kingdom. This family represents a valuable source of material for future genetic dissection of autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH), shown to be a heterogeneous disease through molecular analysis.",4
"To: Lindner T, Cockburn BN, Bell GI (1999). Molecular genetics of MODY in Germany. Diabetologia 42: 121-123. || Adult Amino Acid Substitution DNA-Binding Proteins Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Germany Glucokinase Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta Humans Mutation Nuclear Proteins Transcription Factors || ",4
"Antenatal diagnosis of fetal genotype determines if maternal hyperglycemia due to a glucokinase mutation requires treatment. || Adult Diabetes, Gestational Female Genotype Glucokinase Humans Hyperglycemia Mutation Pregnancy Prenatal Diagnosis || In women with hyperglycemia due to heterozygous glucokinase (GCK) mutations, the fetal genotype determines its growth. If the fetus inherits the mutation, birth weight is normal when maternal hyperglycemia is not treated, whereas intensive treatment may adversely reduce fetal growth. However, fetal genotype is not usually known antenatally, making treatment decisions difficult. We report two women with gestational diabetes mellitus resulting from GCK mutations with hyperglycemia sufficient to merit treatment. In both women, DNA from chorionic villus sampling, performed after high-risk aneuploidy screening, showed the fetus had inherited the GCK mutation. Therefore, maternal hyperglycemia was not treated. Both offspring had a normal birth weight and no peripartum complications. In pregnancies where the mother has hyperglycemia due to a GCK mutation, knowing the fetal GCK genotype guides the management of maternal hyperglycemia. Fetal genotyping should be performed when fetal DNA is available from invasive prenatal diagnostic testing.",4
"Germline mutations in components of the Ras signaling pathway in Noonan syndrome and related disorders. || Animals Genes, ras Germ-Line Mutation Humans Models, Biological Noonan Syndrome Signal Transduction || Ras proteins control a variety of critical cellular processes, and somatic mutations in RAS genes (and other members of signaling networks regulated by Ras) are common in human malignancies. Ras proteins are guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins that cycle between active GTP-bound and inactive guanosine diphosphate (GDP) bound conformations. Cancer-associated Ras mutations typically alter amino acids G12, G13 or Q61. These mutant Ras proteins display impaired GTPase activity and are resistant to GTPase activating proteins (GAPs). We and others recently discovered novel germline KRAS mutations in individuals diagnosed with Noonan or cardio-facio-cutanous (CFC) syndrome, two clinically overlapping disorders characterized by short stature, distinct facial anomalies, heart defects, and other developmental abnormalities. We found that the mutant K-Ras proteins encoded by NS-associated alleles have less pronounced biochemical defects than known Ras oncoproteins, which likely explains why these mutations are tolerated in the germline. Together with the recent findings of mutations in other members of the Ras signaling cascade in CFC syndrome and in Costello syndrome, another clinically related disorder, it is now clear that Noonan-like features are common phenotypic consequences of systemic deregulation of the Ras pathway. The discovery of germline mutations in this group of related genetic disorders underscores the pivotal role of the degree and duration of Ras activation in cell fate decisions during embryonic development and morphogenesis.",4 0
"FH clinical phenotype in Greek patients with LDL-R defective vs. negative mutations. || Apolipoprotein B-100 Apolipoproteins B Cholesterol Cholesterol, LDL DNA Mutational Analysis Female Greece Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Mutation Phenotype Receptors, LDL || Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is caused by mutations in the low-density lipoprotein receptor gene and the gene encoding apolipoprotein B-100, affecting one in 500 individuals. One hundred and eighty-three Greek FH patients were screened for mutations on the LDLR and ApoB genes. We identified mutations in 67 probands and 11 relatives. Sixteen mutations located in eight different exons and the promoter of the LDLR were discovered. Among them 10 were missense mutations (C6W, S265R, A370T, Q363P, D365E, V408M, A410T, A517T, G528D, G571E), two were nonsense mutations (Q363X and C660X), three were splice defects (2140 + 5G-->A and 2140 + 9C-->T, 1706 - 10G-->A), and one was a nucleotide substitution (- 45delT) on the promoter. None of the subjects carried any apoB mutation. The detection rate of mutations in this study was 43%. From the above mutations, A410T, A519T and the splice site defects 2140 + 9C-->T were detected for the first time in the Greek population. Among them V408M, G528D, C6W and S265R account for 73% of heterozygous FH probands. V408M mutation is more common in Central West, while C6W is more common in Central East. Separating the patients into two groups (receptor defective and receptor negative) we found that the receptor negative group had higher levels of total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and higher prevalence of tendon xanthomas compared with the receptor-defective group. The homogenous molecular basis of familial hypercholesterolaemia in Greece facilitates the application of a DNA diagnostic strategy based on the origin of the patient. The early mutation analysis would add valuable information on the severity of the disease.",4
"A novel, de novo germline TP53 mutation in a rare presentation of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome in the maxilla. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Chondrosarcoma Female Gene Amplification Genes, p53 Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Humans Immunohistochemistry Infant Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Maxillary Neoplasms Osteosarcoma Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || We undertook the genetic analysis of a classic Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) family with clustering of primary tumours including two maxillary sarcomas, a rare LFS site of tumour occurrence. Our aim was to investigate the presence of a specific type of TP53 mutation that could be associated with this unusual predilection of site for cancer occurrence. Mutational screening of the coding region of TP53 revealed an A>T transversion in codon 144 of exon 5 (CAG>CTG, Gln>Leu) in the germline of one of the three affected members, with loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the tumour tissue. All other affected members were negative for germline or somatic TP53 mutations. TP53 immunohistochemistry was uninformative. The mutation we report is a de novo constitutional TP53 mutation that has not been previously described in the literature. It could explain the more burdened phenotype of the affected patient (died at 21 months). Alternative mechanisms to explain the overall family phenotype are discussed.",3 4
"Mutation spectrum of the connexin 26 (GJB2) gene in Taiwanese patients with prelingual deafness. ||  || To determine the mutation spectrum of the connexin 26 gene among 324 Taiwanese patients with prelingual deafness and the carrier rate of gene mutation in another 432 unrelated control subjects. The coding region of the connexin 26 gene was sequenced in both directions to detect mutation in all 756 samples. Among the 756 samples tested, 21 connexin 26 variants were detected, including 7 novel ones. The 235delC mutation was the most common, accounting for 57.6% of the mutant alleles. Among patients, 48 (14.8%) had connexin 26 gene mutations. In the control group, the carrier rate of connexin 26 mutation was estimated at 2.8%. The mutation spectrum of the connexin 26 gene is wide, with more than half of the patients having only one mutation detected. Thus, further efforts are needed to look for possible existence of a second mutant allele.",4
"Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and atrial fibrillation caused by Arg663His beta-cardiac myosin heavy chain mutation. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Amino Acid Sequence Atrial Fibrillation Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic DNA DNA Mutational Analysis Echocardiography Electrocardiography, Ambulatory Female Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Prognosis Retrospective Studies || More than 40 different beta-cardiac myosin heavy chain (beta-MHC) missense mutations have been identified that cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC). Some of these are recognized to have important clinical manifestations, such as an increased incidence of sudden death. We report that the beta-MHC missense mutation Arg663His causes predominant cardiac morphology and atrial fibrillation. Longitudinal clinical evaluations were performed in a kindred with FHC. The nucleotide sequence of the beta-MHC gene was analyzed to define the causal mutation. A missense mutation in the beta-MHC gene, Arg663His, was identified in 24 individuals. Clinical studies demonstrated modest left ventricular hypertrophy in affected individuals, predominantly localized in the proximal segment of the interventricular septum, which increased (average = 40 +/- 8%) during 7 years of follow-up. Results showed that 47% of Arg663His adults (age > 16 years) with ventricular hypertrophy developed atrial fibrillation, significantly more (p <0.001) than observed in ungenotyped FHC populations. Survival of affected individuals remained near normal. The beta-MHC missense mutation Arg663His causes a characteristic pattern of ventricular hypertrophy. Arg663His individuals have a markedly higher prevalence of atrial fibrillation, compared with a population with ungenotyped hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The demonstration of phenotype as a direct consequence of genotype further extends the utility of molecular data in clinical medicine. Early identification of Arg663His individuals has the potential to minimize the serious sequelae of this arrhythmia in this FHC group.",2 4
"An APEX-based genotyping microarray for the screening of 168 mutations associated with familial hypercholesterolemia. || Apolipoproteins B Czech Republic DNA Mutational Analysis Gene Expression Profiling Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Mass Screening Mutation Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Predictive Value of Tests Receptors, LDL Reproducibility of Results Sensitivity and Specificity || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an inborn disorder of lipid metabolism characterised by elevated plasma concentrations of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and total cholesterol. This imbalance results in accelerated atherosclerosis and premature coronary heart disease. The early identification and treatment of FH patients is extremely important because it leads to significant reduction of both coronary morbidity and mortality. FH is transmitted in an autosomal dominant manner and associated predominantly with mutations in the genes encoding the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and its ligand apolipoprotein B (APOB). To date, more than 1000 sequence variants have been described in the LDLR gene. In marked contrast to LDLR, only one APOB mutation is prevalent in Europe. The aim of this study was, on the basis of data obtained by the molecular genetic analysis of 1945 Czech FH probands, to propose, generate, and validate a new diagnostic tool, an APEX (Arrayed Primer EXtension)-based genotyping DNA microarray called the FH chip. The FH chip contains the APOB mutation p.Arg3527Gln, all 89 LDLR point mutations and small DNA rearrangements detected in Czech FH patients, and 78 mutations frequent in other European and Asian FH populations. The validation phase revealed the sensitivity and specificity of this platform, 100% and 99.1%, respectively. This FH chip is a rapid, reproducible, specific, and cost-effective tool for genotyping, and in combination with MLPA (multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification) represents a reliable molecular genetic protocol for the large-scale screening of FH mutations in the Czech population.",4
"Burden of Recurrent and Ancestral Mutations in Families With Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. || Adult Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Carrier Proteins Death, Sudden, Cardiac Female Genetic Association Studies Haplotypes Humans Male Middle Aged Myosin Heavy Chains Phenotype Polymorphism, Genetic Recurrence || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a genetically heterogeneous myocardial disease with >1000 causal variants identified. Nonunique variants account for disease in many families. We sought to characterize nonunique variants in Australian families and determine whether they arise from common ancestral mutations or recurrent mutation events. Genetic test results of 467 index patients from apparently unrelated families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were evaluated. Causal variants were found in 185 of 467 (40%) families. Nonunique variants accounted for 122 of 185 (66%) families. The most common single genetic cause of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the recurrent MYBPC3 (myosin-binding protein-C) variant c.1504C>T, p.Arg502Trp, which was found in 13 of 185 (7%) families with a causal variant identified. Thirteen variants inMYBPC3 andMYH7 (myosin heavy chain 7) were each identified >3 times and accounted for 78 of 185 (42%) hypertrophic cardiomyopathy families with a causal variant. Haplotype analysis of these 13 variants was performed on 126 individuals from 70 Australian families, and 11 variants arose through recurrent mutation events. Two variants,MYBPC3 c.1928-2A>G andMYH7 c.2681A>G, p.Glu894Gly, were found on 1 haplotype in 6 families each, supportive of a single mutation event inherited from a common ancestor. The majority of families with a causal variant identified have a nonunique variant. Discovery of the genetic origins of human disease forms a fundamental basis for improved understanding of disease pathogenesis and phenotype development.",4
"GCK-MODY in the US National Monogenic Diabetes Registry: frequently misdiagnosed and unnecessarily treated. || GCK Genetic testing Glucokinase MODY Monogenic diabetes || GCK-MODY leads to mildly elevated blood glucose typically not requiring therapy. It has been described in all ethnicities, but mainly in Caucasian Europeans. Here we describe our US cohort of GCK-MODY. We examined the rates of detection of heterozygous mutations in the GCK gene in individuals referred to the US Monogenic Diabetes Registry with a phenotype consistent with GCK-MODY. We also assessed referral patterns, treatment and demography, including ethnicity, of the cohort. Deleterious heterozygous GCK mutations were found in 54.7 % of Registry probands selected for GCK sequencing for this study. Forty-nine percent were previously unnecessarily treated with glucose-lowering agents, causing hypoglycemia and other adverse effects in some of the subjects. The proportion of probands found to have a GCK mutation through research-based testing was similar across each ethnic group. However, together African-American, Latino and Asian subjects represented only 20.5 % of screened probands and 17.2 % of those with GCK-MODY, despite higher overall diabetes prevalence in these groups. Our data show that a high detection rate of GCK-MODY is possible based on clinical phenotype and that prior to genetic diagnosis, a large percentage are inappropriately treated with glucose-lowering therapies. We also find low minority representation in our Registry, which may be due to disparities in diagnostic diabetes genetic testing and is an area needing further investigation.",4
"Low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene mutations in Canadian subjects with familial hypercholesterolemia, but not of French descent. ||  || Heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a relatively common autosomal dominant disorder, which is characterized by elevated plasma concentrations of low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and early coronary heart disease. FH results from mutations in the gene encoding the LDL receptor (LDLR). In Canada, there is a founder effect for LDLR mutations in FH among individuals of French descent, most of whom reside in the province of Quebec. However, the spectrum of mutations in other regions, specifically in the populous and predominantly English-speaking province of Ontario, has not been studied. We sequenced the coding regions, promoter and intron-exon boundaries of the LDLR gene in 60 Ontario FH subjects from a variety of ethnic backgrounds other than French Canadian. We found 25 LDLR mutations in 34 subjects. Eleven LDLR mutations were novel, including two in-frame deletions of a single amino acid (one each in exons 2 and 4), two larger deletions that shifted the reading frame (one each in exons 4 and 10), five missense mutations (C42R, A370T, T413M, L561P and E760D) and two splice acceptor mutations (one each in introns 3 and 8). The results indicate that FH is more genetically diverse in Ontario than in Quebec. The results are also consistent with findings from investigations of the LDLR in FH conducted in other countries, in which PCR-based, exon-by-exon sequencing uncovers small mutations in about half of the subjects screened. The gap in molecular diagnosis suggests that lesions not found by this sequencing strategy, such as larger scale LDLR mutations that cannot be amplified, may underlie a substantial number of cases of FH. Alternatively, there might be genetic heterogeneity underlying the FH phenotype, with contributions from other single or multiple genes. Hum Mutat 18:359, 2001.",4
"Genetic epidemiological study doesn't support GLA IVS4+919G>A variant is a significant mutation in Fabry disease. || Adult Aged Alternative Splicing Animals COS Cells Cell Line Cercopithecus aethiops Cohort Studies Fabry Disease Female HEK293 Cells Heart Diseases Humans Infant, Newborn K562 Cells MCF-7 Cells Male Middle Aged Mutation Taiwan alpha-Galactosidase || The GLA IVS4+919G>A which is linked to late-onset Fabry disease shows high frequency in Taiwan. To determine whether IVS4+919G>A is a frequent cause of heart disease, we genotyped it in normal controls and other disease cohorts (type 2 diabetes, heart failure, ventricular tachycardia, atrial fibrillation and coronary artery disease). Normal controls and diabetes patients carrying the variant were evaluated for their cardiac condition. Minigene constructs were used to study GLA splicing patterns in different cell lines. GLA IVS4+919A was found in 4/1634 males (0.245%) and 2/1634 females (0.123%) in normal controls and in 4/2133 males (0.188%) and 7/1816 females (0.385%) in the type 2 diabetes cohort. Of all the 17 IVS4+919A carriers in these two groups, only two males reported heart-related disease (myocardial infarction and hypertensive heart disease). Furthermore, in the heart disease cohort (n=649), only one male carried the variant. Minigene constructs showed that the AGS (stomach) cell line showed a distinct GLA splicing pattern. Most subjects carrying GLA IVS4+919A did not show abnormal cardiac phenotypes. The near-absence of GLA IVS4+919A in heart disease cohort suggested that this variant is not a frequent cause of overt heart diseases in Taiwan and that the genotype-phenotype correlation and natural course of the disease need further investigation. We also showed that the GLA IVS4+919G>A nucleotide change did influence alternative splicing in a tissue-specific manner. The GLA IVS4+919G>A variant is not a frequent cause of overt heart disease in Taiwan.",4
"In the thick of it: HCM-causing mutations in myosin binding proteins of the thick filament. || Animals Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Humans Mice Mice, Transgenic Mutation Myosin Light Chains Myosins || In the 20 years since the discovery of the first mutation linked to familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), an astonishing number of mutations affecting numerous sarcomeric proteins have been described. Among the most prevalent of these are mutations that affect thick filament binding proteins, including the myosin essential and regulatory light chains and cardiac myosin binding protein (cMyBP)-C. However, despite the frequency with which myosin binding proteins, especially cMyBP-C, have been linked to inherited cardiomyopathies, the functional consequences of mutations in these proteins and the mechanisms by which they cause disease are still only partly understood. The purpose of this review is to summarize the known disease-causing mutations that affect the major thick filament binding proteins and to relate these mutations to protein function. Conclusions emphasize the impact that discovery of HCM-causing mutations has had on fueling insights into the basic biology of thick filament proteins and reinforce the idea that myosin binding proteins are dynamic regulators of the activation state of the thick filament that contribute to the speed and force of myosin-driven muscle contraction. Additional work is still needed to determine the mechanisms by which individual mutations induce hypertrophic phenotypes.",4
"Update of the pompe disease mutation database with 60 novel GAA sequence variants and additional studies on the functional effect of 34 previously reported variants. || Databases, Genetic Genetic Predisposition to Disease Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive lysosomal glycogen storage disorder, characterized by progressive muscle weakness. Deficiency of acid α-glucosidase (EC; 3.2.1.20/3) can be caused by numerous pathogenic variants in the GAA gene. The Pompe Disease Mutation Database at http://www.pompecenter.nl aims to list all variants and their effect. This update reports on 94 variants. We examined 35 novel and 34 known mutations by site-directed mutagenesis and transient expression in COS-7 cells or HEK293T cells. Each of these mutations was given a severity rating using a previously published system, based on the level of acid α-glucosidase activity in medium and transfected cells and on the quantity and quality of the different molecular mass species in the posttranslational modification and transport of acid α-glucosidase. This approach enabled to classify 55 missense mutations as pathogenic and 13 as likely nonpathogenic. Based on their nature and the use of in silico analysis (Alamut® software), 12 of the additional 25 novel mutations were predicted to be pathogenic including 4 splicing mutations, 6 mutations leading to frameshift, and 2 point mutations causing stop codons. Seven of the additional mutations were considered nonpathogenic (4 silent and 3 occurring in intron regions), and 6 are still under investigation.",1 4 0
"Screening of mutations in the GCK gene in Jordanian maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 2 (MODY2) patients. ||  || Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 2 (MODY2) is a genetic form of diabetes mellitus caused by mutations in the glucokinase gene (GCK). We assessed the frequency of GCK gene mutations in Jordanian suspected MODY2 patients. We screened exons 7, 8 and 9, which are specific for pancreatic glucokinase, for mutations at positions 682A>G, p.T228A; 895G>C, p.G299R, and 1148C>A, p.S383X, respectively, in 250 subjects (100 patients suspected to have MODY2 and 150 healthy controls without family history of diabetes mellitus). We did not find any association of these mutations in Jordanian suspected MODY2 patients or in healthy controls, different from data on Caucasian Italian patients screened for the same mutations.",4
"Molecular genetics of familial hypercholesterolemia in Israel. || Arabs Blotting, Southern DNA Mutational Analysis Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Israel Jews Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Receptors, LDL || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disease caused by a multitude of low density lipoprotein receptor (LDL-R) mutations. The purpose of the current investigation was to define the spectrum of mutations causing FH in Israel and determine their relative distribution among diverse origin groups. A total of 193 FH families were recruited in Israel, 54 of them through the MED PED (Make Early Diagnosis Prevent Early Death) FH program. Molecular analysis of the LDL-R using single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) or denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) or both has been completed in 95 index cases. This analysis resulted in the identification of 15 LDL receptor mutations, including 7 novel mutations (del 197, C308G, R385W, splice junction mutation of intron 14, del 328, del 502-505, stop 10, del 165), that were present in 49 index cases (52%). The 15 mutations are mapped to three known functional domains of the receptor (7 in the LDL-binding region, 7 in the epidermal growth factor precursor homology region and 1 in the membrane-spanning region). Screening for the identified mutations in the remaining 98 index cases enabled the molecular diagnosis of 31 additional cases. It is therefore concluded that 80 out of 193 index cases (41%) harbor 1 of the 15 mutations described here. Three mutations-del197 (FH-Lithuania), D147H (FH-Sephardic), and stop660 (Lebanese allele)-were found in a total of 66 index cases (34%); these may be regarded as founder mutations in the three respective origin groups. In conclusion, in Israel molecular heterogeneity at the LDL receptor gene locus reflects the ethnic distribution of its origin groups. The results of the present investigation provide valuable diagnostic tools for a subset of the Israeli patients with FH who are at high risk for atherosclerosis and its complications.",4
"Clinical features and outcome of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated with triple sarcomere protein gene mutations. || Actin Cytoskeleton Adult Age of Onset Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Female Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Sarcomeres || The aim of this study was to describe the clinical profile associated with triple sarcomere gene mutations in a large hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) cohort. In patients with HCM, double or compound sarcomere gene mutation heterozygosity might be associated with earlier disease onset and more severe outcome. The occurrence of triple mutations has not been reported. A total of 488 unrelated index HCM patients underwent screening for myofilament gene mutations by direct deoxyribonucleic acid sequencing of 8 genes, including myosin binding protein C (MYBPC3), beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH7), regulatory and essential light chains (MYL2, MYL3), troponin-T (TNNT2), troponin-I (TNNI3), alpha-tropomyosin (TPM1), and actin (ACTC). Of the 488 index patients, 4 (0.8%) harbored triple mutations, as follows: MYH7-R869H, MYBPC3-E258K, and TNNI3-A86fs in a 32-year-old woman; MYH7-R723C, MYH7-E1455X, and MYBPC3-E165D in a 46-year old man; MYH7-R869H, MYBPC3-K1065fs, and MYBPC3-P371R in a 45-year old woman; and MYH7-R1079Q, MYBPC3-Q969X, and MYBPC3-R668H in a 50-year old woman. One had a history of resuscitated cardiac arrest, and 3 had significant risk factors for sudden cardiac death, prompting the insertion of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator in all, with appropriate shocks in 2 patients. Moreover, 3 of 4 patients had a severe phenotype with progression to end-stage HCM by the fourth decade, requiring cardiac transplantation (n=1) or biventricular pacing (n=2). The fourth patient, however, had clinically mild disease. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by triple sarcomere gene mutations was rare but conferred a remarkably increased risk of end-stage progression and ventricular arrhythmias, supporting an association between multiple sarcomere defects and adverse outcome. Comprehensive genetic testing might provide important insights to risk stratification and potentially indicate the need for differential surveillance strategies based on genotype.",1 4
"Predicting cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM) status in Pompe disease using GAA mutations: lessons learned from 10 years of clinical laboratory testing experience. || Antibody Formation Cells, Cultured Cross Reactions Enzyme Replacement Therapy Ethnic Groups Fibroblasts Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunomodulation Infant Infant, Newborn Mutation alpha-Glucosidases || Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) for Pompe disease using recombinant acid alpha-glucosidase (rhGAA) has resulted in increased survival although the clinical response is variable. Cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM)-negative status has been recognized as a poor prognostic factor. CRIM-negative patients make no GAA protein and develop sustained high antibody titers to ERT that render the treatment ineffective. Antibody titers are generally low for the majority of CRIM-positive patients and there is typically a better clinical outcome. Because immunomodulation has been found to be most effective in CRIM-negative patients prior to, or shortly after, initiation of ERT, knowledge of CRIM status is important before ERT is begun. We have analyzed 243 patients with infantile Pompe disease using a Western blot method for determining CRIM status and using cultured skin fibroblasts. Sixty-one out of 243 (25.1%) patients tested from various ethnic backgrounds were found to be CRIM-negative. We then correlated the CRIM results with GAA gene mutations where available (52 CRIM-negative and 88 CRIM-positive patients). We found that, in most cases, CRIM status can be predicted from GAA mutations, potentially circumventing the need for invasive skin biopsy and time wasted in culturing cells in the future. Continued studies in this area will help to increase the power of GAA gene mutations in predicting CRIM status as well as possibly identifying CRIM-positive patients who are at risk for developing high antibody titers.",3 1 4 0
"Hereditary leukemia due to rare RUNX1c splice variant (L472X) presents with eczematous phenotype. ||  || Deleterious mutations in the RUNX1 gene cause hereditary leukemia due to a rare syndrome called Familial platelet Disorder with Associated Myeloid Malignancy (FPDMM). We describe the characteristics of a family with FPDMM due to a novel RUNX1 mutation (L472X), located in the most 3-prime end of the gene reported to date. Our 36-year old proband presented with incidentally detected thrombocytopenia and a family history suggestive of FPDMM. Contrary to previously described families, affected members of our kindred express an eczematous phenotype, reportedly most severe in members who develop leukemia. Pedigree analysis shows that the L472X mutation tracks with thrombocytopenia, acute leukemia, and eczema. The L472X mutation produces a stably expressed RUNX1 protein product with a corresponding decrease in wild type RUNX1 expression. Our data supports the inclusion of eczema in the FPDMM phenotype and suggests the possibility that the RUNX1 L472X mutant causes the type of dominant negative affect that is associated with an elevated risk of leukemia in FPDMM families.",2 4 0
"Germline p53 single-base changes associated with Balkan endemic nephropathy. || Adult Aged Amino Acid Substitution Balkan Nephropathy DNA Mutational Analysis Female Humans Male Middle Aged Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || The Balkan endemic nephropathy (BEN) is a significant clinical and scientific problem in need of novel effective therapies. Though many genetic and environmental factors have been investigated the basis, cause, and predisposition to BEN are still unclear. In this study, based on the hypothesis that the genetic pathways leading to BEN might be associated with p53 dysfunction, we screened for p53 gene mutations 90 Bulgarian BEN patients using optimized PCR-SSCP-sequencing analysis. Germline p53 single-base changes were found in blood samples in 10% of BEN cases. Three of them caused amino acid substitutions (p.Arg283Cys, p.Gln317His, and p.Lys321Glu); the other six were either synonymous amino acid substitutions (p.Arg213Arg) or intron polymorphisms (T14766C). To the best of our knowledge, these are the first data investigating tumor suppressor gene mutations in patients with BEN. The obtained results are in support of our hypothesis that p53 gene alterations are possibly involved in BEN genetic pathways.",4
"Molecular epidemiology of Usher syndrome in Italy. || Age of Onset Alleles DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Heterogeneity Genotype Hearing Loss Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Italy Molecular Epidemiology Mutation Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Phenotype Severity of Illness Index Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by hearing and vision loss. Usher syndrome is divided into three clinical subclasses (type 1, type 2, and type 3), which differ in terms of the severity and progression of hearing loss and the presence or absence of vestibular symptoms. Usher syndrome is defined by significant genetic heterogeneity, with at least 12 distinct loci described and 9 genes identified. This study aims to provide a molecular epidemiology report of Usher syndrome in Italy. Molecular data have been obtained on 75 unrelated Italian patients using the most up-to date technology available for the screening of Usher syndrome gene mutations, i.e., the genotyping microarray developed by Asper Biotech (Tartu, Estonia), which simultaneously investigates 612 different marker positions using the well established arrayed primer extension methodology (APEX). Using this method, we found that 12% of cases (9 out of 75) harbored homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the gene positions analyzed, whereas 20% (15 out of 75) of the patients were characterized by the presence of only one mutated allele based on the positions analyzed. One patient was found to be compound heterozygous for mutations in two different genes and this represents an example of possible digenic inheritance in Usher syndrome. A total of 66.6% of cases (50 out of 75) were found to be completely negative for the presence of Usher syndrome gene mutations in the detected positions. Mutations detected by the array were confirmed by direct sequencing. These findings highlight the efficacy of the APEX-based genotyping approach in the molecular assessment of Usher patients, suggesting the presence of alleles not yet identified and/or the involvement of additional putative genes that may account for the pathogenesis of Usher syndrome.",4
"Aggregate penetrance of genomic variants for actionable disorders in European and African Americans. || Adult African Americans Aged Cardiovascular Diseases European Continental Ancestry Group Exome Female Follow-Up Studies Genes, Dominant Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Variation Humans Longitudinal Studies Male Middle Aged Mutation Penetrance Phenotype Prospective Studies Risk Factors United States || In populations that have not been selected for family history of disease, it is unclear how commonly pathogenic variants (PVs) in disease-associated genes for rare Mendelian conditions are found and how often they are associated with clinical features of these conditions. We conducted independent, prospective analyses of participants in two community-based epidemiological studies to test the hypothesis that persons carrying PVs in any of 56 genes that lead to 24 dominantly inherited, actionable conditions are more likely to exhibit the clinical features of the corresponding diseases than those without PVs. Among 462 European American Framingham Heart Study (FHS) and 3223 African-American Jackson Heart Study (JHS) participants who were exome-sequenced, we identified and classified 642 and 4429 unique variants, respectively, in these 56 genes while blinded to clinical data. In the same participants, we ascertained related clinical features from the participants' clinical history of cancer and most recent echocardiograms, electrocardiograms, and lipid measurements, without knowledge of variant classification. PVs were found in 5 FHS (1.1%) and 31 JHS (1.0%) participants. Carriers of PVs were more likely than expected, on the basis of incidence in noncarriers, to have related clinical features in both FHS (80.0% versus 12.4%) and JHS (26.9% versus 5.4%), yielding standardized incidence ratios of 6.4 [95% confidence interval (CI), 1.7 to 16.5; P = 7 × 10-4) in FHS and 4.7 (95% CI, 1.9 to 9.7; P = 3 × 10-4) in JHS. Individuals unselected for family history who carry PVs in 56 genes for actionable conditions have an increased aggregated risk of developing clinical features associated with the corresponding diseases.",4
"Impact of genetic defects on atherosclerosis in patients suspected of familial hypercholesterolaemia. || Adult Apolipoproteins B Arteriosclerosis Carotid Arteries Cholesterol, LDL Female Femoral Artery Heterozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Receptors, LDL Risk Factors Ultrasonography || Among patients with severe hypercholesterolaemia and a family history of early cardiovascular disease, we assessed whether patients with mutations of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor and apolipoprotein B genes related to familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) have a different degree of atherosclerosis than those without such mutations. In our lipid clinics, 273 patients were selected on the basis of a severe hypercholesterolaemia (cholesterol above 95th percentile) and a family history of early cardiovascular disease. By molecular genetic test, 122 patients were classified as FH. Atherosclerosis was evaluated by the ultrasonographic measurement of intima-media thickness (IMT) in the carotid and femoral arteries. Despite the fact that non-FH individuals had a higher prevalence of obesity, hypertension, diabetes and hypertriglyceridaemia, FH individuals had significantly greater carotid and femoral IMT than non-FH patients: difference between carotid and femoral IMT, respectively, 0.19 mm (95% CI, 0.08-0.29; P < 0.001) and 0.20 mm (95% CI, 0.09-0.35; P = 0.001), respectively. These differences remained statistically significant after adjustment for the various risk factors as well as in sub-analysis restricted to the patients with LDL-cholesterol between 240 and 300 mg dL-1 (range with similar distribution in the two groups). When classified according to the severity of their mutations, FH individuals with null LDL receptor allele tended to have thicker carotid IMT than FH individuals carrying the LDL receptor-defective allele. Among patients with severe hypercholesterolaemia and a family history of early cardiovascular disease, the presence of a genetically ascertained FH is associated with a higher degree of atherosclerosis. This suggests that molecular genetic identification of FH may be helpful to evaluate better the coronary heart disease risk in these patients.",4
The effect of castration and peroral estrogen therapy on some psychological functions. ||  || ,4
"[Mutations in sarcomeric genes MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNT2, TNNI3, and TPM1 in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy]. || Adolescent Adult Aged Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Cohort Studies Female Gene Frequency Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Risk Assessment Sarcomeres Spain Young Adult || Mutation of a sarcomeric gene is the most frequent cause of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. For each such gene, however, previous studies have reported a range of different mutation frequencies, and clinical manifestations have been highly heterogeneous, both of which limit the use of genetic information in clinical practice. Our aim was to determine the frequency of mutations in the sarcomeric genes MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNT2, TNNI3, and TPM1 in a cohort of Spanish patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. We used sequencing to analyze the coding regions of these five genes in 120 patients (29% with a family history) and investigated how the patient phenotype varied with the gene mutated. In total, 32 patients were found to have mutations: 10 in MYH7 (8%), 20 in MYBPC3 (16%), 2 in TNNT2, 1 in TPM1 and none in TNNI3. Overall, 61% of mutations had not been described before. Two patients had two mutations (i.e., double mutants). There was no difference in the mean age at diagnosis or the extent of the hypertrophy between those with MYH7 mutations and those with MYBPC3 mutations. Some 26% of patients had a mutation in one of the five sarcomeric genes investigated. More than half of the mutations had not been described before. The MYBPC3 gene was the most frequently mutated, followed by MYH7. No phenotypic differences were observed between carriers of the various mutations, which makes it difficult to use genetic information to stratify risk in these patients.",4
"Several mutations in the melanocortin-4 receptor gene including a nonsense and a frameshift mutation associated with dominantly inherited obesity in humans. || Adolescent Adult Child Female Frameshift Mutation Genes, Dominant Humans Male Mutation, Missense Obesity Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Corticotropin || The melanocortin-4 receptor gene (MC4-R) has been implicated in weight regulation. Recently, two independent groups reported frameshift mutations associated with a dominant form of obesity (1, 2). We screened the coding region of the MC4-R in 306 extremely obese children and adolescents (mean body mass index: BMI 34.4 +/- 6.6 kg/m2), 25 healthy underweight students (mean BMI 17.1 +/- 0.8 kg/m2), 52 normal weight individuals (mean BMI 22.0 +/- 1.0 kg/m2), 51 inpatients with anorexia nervosa (AN, DSM IV criteria, mean BMI 14.3 +/- 1.5 kg/m2) and 27 patients with bulimia nervosa (BN, DSM IV criteria, mean BMI 21.7 +/- 5.8 kg/m2) by single strand conformation polymorphism analysis (SSCP). Several mutations were identified, including the frameshift mutation described (1). The mutations were as follows: a) The deletion of 4 bp (delta of CTCT at codon 211) results in a frameshift, thus rendering a truncated protein. This mutation has been assumed to be associated with dominantly-inherited morbid obesity in humans (1). Both the index patient (BMI 42.06 kg/m2, height 171 cm, age 19.6 years) and her mother (BMI 37.55 kg/m2, height 164 cm, age 42.5 years) were heterozygous for the deletion. b) A nonsense mutation at position 35 of the MC4-R was detected in two obese probands (BMI 31.29 kg/m2 and BMI 45.91 kg/m2). This mutation leads to a truncated protein that encompasses the N-terminal extracellular domain. Both carriers additionally showed (c) a missense mutation (Asp-37-Val). In both of these cases Tyr-35-Stop and Asp-37-Val were maternally transmitted, thus these variations form a haplotype. d) e) A male obese proband harbored two missense mutations (Ser-30-Phe, Gly-252-Ser). f)-i) Four different missense mutations (Pro-78-Leu, Thr-112-Met, Arg-165-Trp, Ile-317-Thr) were detected in four different male probands, respectively. All of these mutations (a to i) were found solely in extremely obese individuals whose BMIs were all above the 99th percentile. j) A silent mutation (C-579-T, Val-193-Val) was detected in a male underweight individual. k) A previously described polymorphism (Val-103-Ile; 3) was detected with similar frequencies in all different study groups. 1) We identified a novel polymorphism (Ile-251-Leu) with similar allele frequencies in all groups under study. In conclusion, our data indicate that mutations in the MC4-R are not uncommon. Whereas our data support the evidence for dominantly inherited obesity as revealed by the three obese probands with haplo-insufficiency, the functional significance of the missense mutations remains to be determined.",4
"Juvenile and adult-onset acid maltase deficiency in France: genotype-phenotype correlation. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Child Female France Genotype Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Male Middle Aged Muscles Mutation Phenotype Tomography, X-Ray Computed || To characterize the phenotypes of patients with juvenile and adult-onset acid maltase deficiency (AMD) in the French population and correlate them with genetic defects. AMD is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by the absence of the enzyme acid a-glucosidase (GAA). Patients are generally compound heterozygotes for various mutations in the GAA gene. The most common mutant allele is a -13T to G transversion in intron 1. The authors performed a clinical, biochemical, and genetic study on 21 unrelated patients with juvenile and adult-onset AMD. Although onset of progressive muscle weakness occurred during adulthood in all cases but one, presence of mild, nonprogressive muscular symptoms appearing during childhood was detected in 16 patients. Eighteen patients had a similar clinical pattern with pelvic girdle muscle weakness predominating in glutei and thigh adductors. Restrictive respiratory insufficiency with vital capacity less than 60% was noted in eight patients, and respiratory failure was the first manifestation in two cases. All patients but one were compound heterozygotes, and 17 carried the IVS1 (-13T ---> G) transversion (one patient was homozygous for this mutation). The two mutated alleles were identified in 10 cases, with 13 different mutations detected in the GAA gene. There was no clear correlation between the type of mutation and phenotype. This study shows a high genetic heterogeneity of juvenile and adult AMD in the French population. The absence of genotype-phenotype correlation suggests a complex physiopathology that requires further investigations.",1 4
"Low density lipoprotein--receptor (LDL-R) gene mutations among Filipinos with familial hypercholesterolemia. || Adult Aged Cholesterol, LDL DNA Mutational Analysis Dyslipidemias Female Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Philippines Receptors, LDL || Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disease resulting from mutations of the LDL (LDLR) receptor gene leading to a diminished catabolism and elevated level of LDL cholesterol (LDL-C). It is associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular disease (CVD). The MEDPED (Make Early Diagnosis-Prevent Early Death) program, an initiative cited by the WHO Human Genetics Programme in their report on FH, initiated international collaboration to identify and follow-up patients with FH globally. From Asia-Pacific, only 6 countries are participating and no data among Filipinos particularly on genetic profiles is available at present. This study attempts to initiate data collection and participation in the global initiative. Primary: 1. To describe the phenotype of Filipino patients with FH. 2. To determine and characterize the LDL-R gene mutations among Filipino patients with clinical features of FH. Secondary: To determine the association of the clinical characteristics of FH with the presence of LDLR gene mutations. Cross- Sectional Study. Multicenter, Outpatient Clinic. 60 unrelated patients, 18 y/o and above from UP-PGH, Manila Doctors Hospital and Cardinal Santos Medical Center. FH was diagnosed according to the Dutch Lipid Clinic Network Criteria cited by WHO which is based on a history of premature CVD, family history, tendon xanthoma, arcus cornealis, and LDL C levels. With informed consent, clinical history, physical examination and lipid profile data were determined. Blood samples were extracted, processed to isolate DNA specimens at the National Institutes of Health, Institute of Human Genetics, and sent to Canterbury Health Laboratories at Christchurch, New Zealand for DNA analysis. Descriptive statistics, Fisher's exact test and Student's t-test using Stata version 6.0 software. Sixty patients with a mean age of 55 y/o were included, including 39 (65%) females. The mean LDL level was 227 mg/dl. Cardiovascular Disease and a family history of dyslipidemia were present in 55 & 60% of the samples, respectively. Twenty percent had documented LDL-R gene mutations. Six of the mutations were considered novel. A family history of dyslipidemia, an elevated LDL-C level, and a high FH score exhibited a statistically significant association with mutations. The study population has a high prevalence of CVD at an average age of 55 years with a strong family history of dyslipidemia and very high average LDL-C levels. One out of every 5 patients had LDL-R gene mutations, 6 of which were considered novel. LDL-R gene mutation was significantly associated with family history of dyslipidemia, LDL-C Level and FH score. This is the first international collaborative genetic study among Filipinos with FH. Data could allow the country to participate in the WHO/MEDPED global program. Collaborative efforts will lead to more effective detection, treatment and prevention of CV events. Novel mutations were discovered and further analysis of these genes will be done.",4
"Familial cases of atypical clinical features genetically diagnosed as LEOPARD syndrome (multiple lentigines syndrome). || Adult Aged Biopsy Female Humans Hyperpigmentation LEOPARD Syndrome Male Mutation, Missense Pedigree Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Skin || Five familial cases exhibited ephelides-like multiple lentigines, and we examined three of them, a mother and two sons. All three patients presented with small dark-brown maculae on the face and neck and electrocardiographic abnormalities. These findings sufficed to fulfill the criteria for LEOPARD syndrome (multiple lentigines syndrome), although they lacked five of seven major clinical features. However, the family members presented with a webbed neck and pectus excavatum, which are more frequently seen in Turner or Noonan syndrome. Histological examination of the lentigines revealed slightly elongated rete ridges, a hyperpigmented basal layer, and melanophages in the papillary dermis. Direct sequencing of the patients' genomic DNA revealed that all three had a consistent missense mutation [c.1403C > T (p.T468M)] in the PTPN11 gene, confirming LEOPARD syndrome with an atypical phenotype. It was suggested that LEOPARD syndrome shows a diverse phenotype but its diagnosis can be verified by mutation analysis.",2 4
"Mutation analysis of the genes involved in the Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in Korean patients with Noonan syndrome. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genes, ras Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Korea MAP Kinase Signaling System Male Models, Biological Mutation Noonan Syndrome Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases || Noonan syndrome (NS) is a congenital abnormality that affects multiple parts of the body. Approximately 50% of cases are caused by mutations in the PTPN11 gene. NS shares many clinical features with a group of developmental disorders including Costello syndrome and cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome. Recently, KRAS and SOS1 were identified as causative genes for NS. Moreover, mutations in several genes associated with the Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, including HRAS, BRAF, MEK1, and MEK2 were identified in patients with Costello syndrome and CFC syndrome. Accordingly, this study carried out mutation analysis of nine genes including PTPN11, SOS1, GRB2, KRAS, HRAS, NRAS, BRAF, MEK1, and MEK2 associated with the Ras-MAPK pathway in 14 Korean patients with NS. Seven patients were found to have mutations in the PTPN11 gene. Mutation analyses of the other genes did not reveal any disease causing mutations except for one unclassified variation in the 3'-untranslated region of the HRAS gene (c.*1C>T). The patient's father also had the same substitution with the normal phenotype. Therefore, this variation is believed to be either a rare polymorphism or a disease-related variation with variable penetrance. The Ras-MAPK pathway has now emerged as a key cascade in a group of similar developmental disorders as well as in many types of cancers. This study found that, with the exception of PTPN11, mutations in genes related to the Ras-MAPK pathway appear to be uncommon, at least in Korean patients with NS.",4
"[Beta-myosin heavy-chain gene mutations in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy]. || Adolescent Adult Aged Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Data Interpretation, Statistical Death, Sudden, Cardiac Female Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Phenotype Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational || To determine the frequency of mutations in the beta-myosin heavy-chain gene (MYH7) in a cohort of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and their families, and to investigate correlations between genotype and phenotype. Single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and sequencing of fragments with abnormal MYH7 gene mobility were carried out in 128 consecutive index patients with HCM. The phenotypes of patients with and without mutations were compared and the phenotypes of identified families were recorded. A total of 11 mutations were found in 13 families (10%); 7/11 had been previously described. The I736T mutation was found in three families and the A797T in two. One patient had two mutations (i.e., I736T and R787H). Mutations were more frequent in patients with a family history of sudden death (31%) and in those with severe hypertrophy (39% had a thickness > or = 30 mm). Mutations were found in 29 of 42 members of the 13 families, including six family members (20%) who were healthy carriers and aged < or = 36 years. Sudden death had occurred in eight members of four families: four in two families with the I736T mutation, one in a family with A797T, one in a family with R870H, and two in a family with A901P. MYH7 mutations were present in 10% of our families. Mutations were more frequent in patients with a family history of sudden death and in those with severe hypertrophy. Most mutations had been described previously. Some appeared in several families. For some mutations, the correlation between genotype and phenotype was stable, while for others, there were marked differences between the phenotypes of the index patients and their relatives, suggesting the presence of additional genetic factors that have yet to be identified.",2 4
"Missense mutations and polymorphisms of the MC4R gene in Polish obese children and adolescents in relation to the relative body mass index. || Adolescent Adult Body Composition Body Mass Index Case-Control Studies Child Child, Preschool DNA European Continental Ancestry Group Female Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Obesity Poland Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Sequence Analysis, DNA || Extensive studies of the MC4R gene polymorphism showed that, among numerous variants, there are mutations responsible for monogenic obesity, as well as polymorphisms negatively correlated with the risk of obesity. In this report, we present the first studies of the whole coding sequence of the MC4R gene in 243 Polish obese children and adolescents (the mean relative body mass index [RBMI] was 163.6). In addition, 101 non-obese adults were also analyzed. Direct sequencing facilitated the identification of six missense (K73R, V103I, T112M, S127L, M215L, and I251L) and one silent (c.756 C > T) single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Two non-synonymous polymorphisms (K73R and M215L) appeared to be novel and one was found in obese patients (M215L, one patient) and one in non-obese adults (K73R, one person). The overall frequency of non-synonymous variant carriers reached 4.1% and 6.9% in obese patients and non-obese adults, respectively. Only one obesity-associated variant (127L) was found in two obese patients (0.82%) and in two non-obese adults (1.98%). The obesity-protecting variants (103I and 251L) appeared to be the most common in both groups: 3.3% and 4.0%, respectively. It was also observed that the RBMI in obese children and adolescents carrying the minor variants did not differ significantly from the non-carriers; however, the expected trends for the associated and protecting variants were observed. We conclude that the contribution of the MC4R gene variants to the pathogenesis of obesity in Polish children and adolescents is low.",4
"Germline mutations in CDH1 are infrequent in women with early-onset or familial lobular breast cancers. || Adult Age of Onset Antigens, CD Breast Neoplasms Cadherins Carcinoma, Lobular DNA Mutational Analysis Family Female Germ-Line Mutation Humans Middle Aged || Germline mutations in CDH1 are associated with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer; lobular breast cancer also occurs excessively in families with such condition. To determine if CDH1 is a susceptibility gene for lobular breast cancer in women without a family history of diffuse gastric cancer, germline DNA was analysed for the presence of CDH1 mutations in 318 women with lobular breast cancer who were diagnosed before the age of 45 years or had a family history of breast cancer and were not known, or known not, to be carriers of germline mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2. Cases were ascertained through breast cancer registries and high-risk cancer genetic clinics (Breast Cancer Family Registry, the kConFab and a consortium of breast cancer genetics clinics in the United States and Spain). Additionally, Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification was performed for 134 cases to detect large deletions. No truncating mutations and no large deletions were detected. Six non-synonymous variants were found in seven families. Four (4/318 or 1.3%) are considered to be potentially pathogenic through in vitro and in silico analysis. Potentially pathogenic germline CDH1 mutations in women with early-onset or familial lobular breast cancer are at most infrequent.",3 4 0
"Mutant alpha-galactosidase A enzymes identified in Fabry disease patients with residual enzyme activity: biochemical characterization and restoration of normal intracellular processing by 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin. || 1-Deoxynojirimycin Animals Binding Sites Cell Communication Cells, Cultured Cercopithecus aethiops Enzyme Stability Fabry Disease Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic Humans Hydrogen-Ion Concentration Kinetics Models, Molecular Mutation Protein Structure, Tertiary Protein Transport alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by the deficiency of alpha-Gal A (alpha-galactosidase A) activity. In order to understand the molecular mechanism underlying alpha-Gal A deficiency in Fabry disease patients with residual enzyme activity, enzymes with different missense mutations were purified from transfected COS-7 cells and the biochemical properties were characterized. The mutant enzymes detected in variant patients (A20P, E66Q, M72V, I91T, R112H, F113L, N215S, Q279E, M296I, M296V and R301Q), and those found mostly in mild classic patients (A97V, A156V, L166V and R356W) appeared to have normal K(m) and V(max) values. The degradation of all mutants (except E59K) was partially inhibited by treatment with kifunensine, a selective inhibitor of ER (endoplasmic reticulum) alpha-mannosidase I. Metabolic labelling and subcellular fractionation studies in COS-7 cells expressing the L166V and R301Q alpha-Gal A mutants indicated that the mutant protein was retained in the ER and degraded without processing. Addition of DGJ (1-deoxygalactonojirimycin) to the culture medium of COS-7 cells transfected with a large set of missense mutant alpha-Gal A cDNAs effectively increased both enzyme activity and protein yield. DGJ was capable of normalizing intracellular processing of mutant alpha-Gal A found in both classic (L166V) and variant (R301Q) Fabry disease patients. In addition, the residual enzyme activity in fibroblasts or lymphoblasts from both classic and variant hemizygous Fabry disease patients carrying a variety of missense mutations could be substantially increased by cultivation of the cells with DGJ. These results indicate that a large proportion of mutant enzymes in patients with residual enzyme activity are kinetically active. Excessive degradation in the ER could be responsible for the deficiency of enzyme activity in vivo, and the DGJ approach may be broadly applicable to Fabry disease patients with missense mutations.",4 0
"Prospective functional classification of all possible missense variants in PPARG. || Amino Acid Substitution Case-Control Studies Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Humans Lipodystrophy Macrophages Male Mutation, Missense Myocardial Infarction PPAR gamma Prospective Studies || Clinical exome sequencing routinely identifies missense variants in disease-related genes, but functional characterization is rarely undertaken, leading to diagnostic uncertainty. For example, mutations in PPARG cause Mendelian lipodystrophy and increase risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Although approximately 1 in 500 people harbor missense variants in PPARG, most are of unknown consequence. To prospectively characterize PPARγ variants, we used highly parallel oligonucleotide synthesis to construct a library encoding all 9,595 possible single-amino acid substitutions. We developed a pooled functional assay in human macrophages, experimentally evaluated all protein variants, and used the experimental data to train a variant classifier by supervised machine learning. When applied to 55 new missense variants identified in population-based and clinical sequencing, the classifier annotated 6 variants as pathogenic; these were subsequently validated by single-variant assays. Saturation mutagenesis and prospective experimental characterization can support immediate diagnostic interpretation of newly discovered missense variants in disease-related genes.",4 0
"Mutations in the CEL VNTR cause a syndrome of diabetes and pancreatic exocrine dysfunction. || Adult Animals CHO Cells Cricetinae Cricetulus Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Humans Insulin-Secreting Cells Lipase Male Minisatellite Repeats Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pancreas, Exocrine Pedigree RNA, Messenger || Dysfunction of the exocrine pancreas is observed in diabetes, but links between concurrent exocrine and endocrine pancreatic disease and contributing genetic factors are poorly characterized. We studied two families with diabetes and exocrine pancreatic dysfunction by genetic, physiological and in vitro functional studies. A genome-wide screen in Family 1 linked diabetes to chromosome 9q34 (maximal lod score 5.07). Using fecal elastase deficiency as a marker of exocrine pancreatic dysfunction refined the critical chromosomal region to 1.16 Mb (maximal lod score 11.6). Here, we identified a single-base deletion in the variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR)-containing exon 11 of the carboxyl ester lipase (CEL) gene, a major component of pancreatic juice and responsible for the duodenal hydrolysis of cholesterol esters. Screening subjects with maturity-onset diabetes of the young identified Family 2, with another single-base deletion in CEL and a similar phenotype with beta-cell failure and pancreatic exocrine disease. The in vitro catalytic activities of wild-type and mutant CEL protein were comparable. The mutant enzyme was, however, less stable and secreted at a lower rate. Furthermore, we found some evidence for an association between common insertions in the CEL VNTR and exocrine dysfunction in a group of 182 unrelated subjects with diabetes (odds ratio 4.2 (1.6, 11.5)). Our findings link diabetes to the disrupted function of a lipase in the pancreatic acinar cells.",2 4
"MLH1-silenced and non-silenced subgroups of hypermutated colorectal carcinomas have distinct mutational landscapes. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Protein Carcinoma Colorectal Neoplasms Gene Expression Profiling Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic Gene Frequency Gene Silencing Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans MicroRNAs Microsatellite Instability MutL Protein Homolog 1 Mutation Nuclear Proteins Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Phenotype Prognosis Proto-Oncogene Proteins Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras) RNA, Messenger Wnt Signaling Pathway ras Proteins || Approximately 15% of colorectal carcinomas (CRCs) exhibit a hypermutated genotype accompanied by high levels of microsatellite instability (MSI-H) and defects in DNA mismatch repair. These tumours, unlike the majority of colorectal carcinomas, are often diploid, exhibit frequent epigenetic silencing of the MLH1 DNA mismatch repair gene, and have a better clinical prognosis. As an adjunct study to The Cancer Genome Atlas consortium that recently analysed 224 colorectal cancers by whole exome sequencing, we compared the 35 CRCs (15.6%) with a hypermutated genotype to those with a non-hypermutated genotype. We found that 22 (63%) of the hypermutated CRCs exhibited transcriptional silencing of the MLH1 gene, a high frequency of BRAF V600E gene mutations, and infrequent APC and KRAS mutations, a mutational pattern significantly different from their non-hypermutated counterparts. However, the remaining 13 (37%) hypermutated CRCs lacked MLH1 silencing, contained tumours with the highest mutation rates ('ultramutated' CRCs), and exhibited higher incidences of APC and KRAS mutations, but infrequent BRAF mutations. These patterns were confirmed in an independent validation set of 250 exome-sequenced CRCs. Analysis of mRNA and microRNA expression signatures revealed that hypermutated CRCs with MLH1 silencing had greatly reduced levels of WNT signalling and increased BRAF signalling relative to non-hypermutated CRCs. Our findings suggest that hypermutated CRCs include one subgroup with fundamentally different pathways to malignancy than the majority of CRCs. Examination of MLH1 expression status and frequencies of APC, KRAS, and BRAF mutation in CRC may provide a useful diagnostic tool that could supplement the standard microsatellite instability assays and influence therapeutic decisions.",4
"Mutations of the beta myosin heavy chain gene in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: critical functional sites determine prognosis. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Cohort Studies Conserved Sequence Female Genotype Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Polymorphism, Genetic Prognosis Risk Factors Sequence Analysis, DNA Survival Analysis || To assess patients with different types of mutations of the beta myosin heavy chain (beta MHC) gene causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and to determine the prognosis of patients according to the affected functional domain of beta MHC. Cohort study of subjects referred to an HCM clinic at an academic hospital. 70 probands from the HCM clinic were screened for mutations of the beta MHC gene and 148 family members of the genotype positive probands were further assessed. The control group for the genetic studies consisted of 106 healthy subjects. Direct DNA sequencing was used to screen 70 probands for mutations of the beta MHC gene. Family members underwent genotypic and detailed clinical, ECG, and echocardiographic assessments. The survival of genotype positive subjects was evaluated according to the type of functional domain affected by the missense mutation and according to phenotypic characteristics. A mutation of the beta MHC gene was detected in 15 of 70 probands (21%). Of 148 family members studied in these 15 families, 74 were identified with a beta MHC defect. Eleven mutations were detected, including four novel mutations: Ala196Thr, Pro211Leu, Val404Leu, and Arg870Cys. Median survival was 66 years (95% confidence interval (CI) 64 to 77 years) in all affected subjects. There was a significant difference in survival between subjects according to the affected functional domain (p = 0.02). Significant independent predictors of decreased survival were the non-conservative (that is, associated with a change in the amino acid charge) missense mutations that affected the actin binding site (hazard ratio 4.4, 95% CI 1.6 to 11.8; p = 0.003) and those that affected the rod portion of beta MHC (hazard ratio 4.8, 95% CI 1.2 to 19.4; p = 0.03). No phenotypic characteristics were associated with decreased survival or cardiovascular morbidity. The type of beta MHC functional domain affected by the missense mutation is predictive of overall prognosis in HCM.",2 4
"Gain-of-function SOS1 mutations cause a distinctive form of Noonan syndrome. || Animals COS Cells Cercopithecus aethiops DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Testing Humans Models, Molecular Mutation Noonan Syndrome SOS1 Protein Transfection || Noonan syndrome is a developmental disorder characterized by short stature, facial dysmorphia, congenital heart defects and skeletal anomalies. Increased RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling due to PTPN11 and KRAS mutations causes 50% of cases of Noonan syndrome. Here, we report that 22 of 129 individuals with Noonan syndrome without PTPN11 or KRAS mutation have missense mutations in SOS1, which encodes a RAS-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factor. SOS1 mutations cluster at codons encoding residues implicated in the maintenance of SOS1 in its autoinhibited form. In addition, ectopic expression of two Noonan syndrome-associated mutants induces enhanced RAS and ERK activation. The phenotype associated with SOS1 defects lies within the Noonan syndrome spectrum but is distinctive, with a high prevalence of ectodermal abnormalities but generally normal development and linear growth. Our findings implicate gain-of-function mutations in a RAS guanine nucleotide exchange factor in disease for the first time and define a new mechanism by which upregulation of the RAS pathway can profoundly change human development.",4 0
"Social Health Insurance-Based Simultaneous Screening for 154 Mutations in 19 Deafness Genes Efficiently Identified Causative Mutations in Japanese Hearing Loss Patients. || Deafness Humans Japan Mutation Social Security || Sensorineural hearing loss is one of the most common neurosensory disorders in humans. The incidence of SNHL is estimated to be 1 in 500-1000 newborns. In more than half of these patients, the hearing loss is associated with genetic causes. In Japan, genetic testing for the patients with SNHL using the Invader assay to screen for 46 mutations in 13 deafness genes was approved by the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare for inclusion in social health insurance coverage in 2012. Furthermore, from August 2015, this genetic testing has been expanded to screen for 154 mutations in 19 deafness genes using targeted genomic enrichment with massively parallel DNA sequencing combined with the Invader assay and TaqMan genotyping. For this study we analyzed 717 unrelated Japanese hearing loss patients. The total allele frequency of 154 mutations in 19 deafness genes was 32.64% (468/1434) and the total numbers of cases associated with at least one mutation was 44.07% (316/717). Among these, we were able to diagnose 212 (30%) patients, indicating that the present screening could efficiently identify causative mutations in hearing loss patients. It is noteworthy that 27 patients (3.8%) had coexistent multiple mutations in different genes. Five of these 27 patients (0.7%, 5/717 overall) were diagnosed with genetic hearing loss affected by concomitant with responsible mutations in more than two different genes. For patients identified with multiple mutations in different genes, it is necessary to consider that several genes might have an impact on their phenotypes.",4
"PTPN11 gene analysis in 74 Brazilian patients with Noonan syndrome or Noonan-like phenotype. || Adolescent Adult Amino Acid Substitution Brazil Child Child, Preschool Female Humans Infant Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins LEOPARD Syndrome Male Neurofibromatoses Noonan Syndrome Phenotype Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases || Mutations in the PTPN11 gene are known to cause a large fraction of the cases of Noonan syndrome. The objective of this study was to determine the PTPN11 gene mutation rate in a cohort of clinically well-characterized Brazilian patients with Noonan or Noonan-like syndromes and to study the genotype-phenotype correlation. Fifty probands with Noonan syndrome ascertained according to well-established diagnostic criteria, 3 with LEOPARD syndrome, 5 with Noonan-like/multiple giant cell lesion syndrome, and 3 with neurofibromatosis/ Noonan were enrolled in this study. Mutational analysis was performed using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) followed by sequencing of amplicons with an aberrant elution profile. We detected missense mutations in the PTPN11 gene in 21 probands with Noonan syndrome (42%), in all 3 patients with LEOPARD syndrome, and in 1 case with Noonan-like/multiple giant cell lesion syndrome. One patient with neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome had a mutation in both the PTPN11 and NF1 genes. The only anomalies that reached statistical significance when comparing probands with and without mutations were the hematological abnormalities. Our data confirms that Noonan syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous disorder, with mutations in the PTPN11 gene responsible for roughly 50% of the cases. A definitive genotype-phenotype correlation has not been established, but the T73I mutation seems to predispose to a myeloproliferative disorder. Regarding Noonan-like syndromes, mutation of the PTPN11 gene is the main causal factor in LEOPARD syndrome, and it also plays a role in neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome. Noonan- like/multiple giant cell lesion syndrome, part of the spectrum of Noonan syndrome, is also heterogeneous.",4
"Association of Exome Sequences With Cardiovascular Traits Among Blacks in the Jackson Heart Study. || Adipokines Adult African Americans Aged Aged, 80 and over Algorithms Biomarkers Cardiovascular Diseases Computational Biology Computer Simulation Databases, Genetic Exome Female Gene Frequency Genetic Association Studies Genetic Markers Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Inflammation Mediators Lipids Longitudinal Studies Male Middle Aged Mississippi Mutation, Missense Phenotype Proprotein Convertase 9 Quantitative Trait, Heritable Risk Factors || The correlation of null alleles with human phenotypes can provide insight into gene function in humans. In individuals of African ancestry, we set out to identify null and damaging missense variants, and test these variants for association with a range of cardiovascular phenotypes. We performed whole-exome sequencing in 3223 black individuals from the Jackson Heart Study and found a total of 729 666 variant sites with minor allele frequency <5%, including 17 263 null variants and 49 929 missense variants predicted to be damaging by in silico algorithms. We tested null and damaging missense variants within each gene for association with 36 cardiovascular traits. We found 3 associations that met our prespecified level of significance (α=1.1×10(-7)). Null and damaging missense variants in PCSK9 were associated with 36 mg/dL lower low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (P=3×10(-21)). Three individuals in their 50s with complete PCSK9 deficiency (each compound heterozygote for PCSK9 p.Y142X and p.C679X) were identified, with one having a coronary artery calcification score in the 83rd percentile despite a low-density lipoprotein cholesterol of 32 mg/dL. A damaging missense variant in HBQ1 (p.G52A) was associated with a 2 pg/cell lower mean corpuscular hemoglobin (P=9×10(-13)) and rare damaging missense variants in VPS13A with higher red blood cell distribution width (P=9.9×10(-8)). A limited number of null/damaging alleles with a large effect on cardiovascular traits were detectable in ≈3000 black individuals.",4
"SLC26A4 mutation frequency and spectrum in 109 Danish Pendred syndrome/DFNB4 probands and a report of nine novel mutations. || Denmark Exons Genotype Goiter, Nodular Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Introns Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Rate Sulfate Transporters || ",4
"Grouping of multiple-lentigines/LEOPARD and Noonan syndromes on the PTPN11 gene. || Adolescent Adult Amino Acid Sequence Child Child, Preschool Exons Female Humans Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Male Mutation, Missense Neurofibromatosis 1 Noonan Syndrome Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Protein Structure, Tertiary Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Sequence Analysis, DNA || Multiple-lentigines (ML)/LEOPARD (multiple lentigines, electrocardiographic-conduction abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary stenosis, abnormal genitalia, retardation of growth, and sensorineural deafness) syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition--characterized by lentigines and café au lait spots, facial anomalies, cardiac defects--that shares several clinical features with Noonan syndrome (NS). We screened nine patients with ML/LEOPARD syndrome (including a mother-daughter pair) and two children with NS who had multiple café au lait spots, for mutations in the NS gene, PTPN11, and found, in 10 of 11 patients, one of two new missense mutations, in exon 7 or exon 12. Both mutations affect the PTPN11 phosphotyrosine phosphatase domain, which is involved in <30% of the NS PTPN11 mutations. The study demonstrates that ML/LEOPARD syndrome and NS are allelic disorders. The detected mutations suggest that distinct molecular and pathogenetic mechanisms cause the peculiar cutaneous manifestations of the ML/LEOPARD-syndrome subtype of NS.",4
"Molecular classification of patients with unexplained hamartomatous and hyperplastic polyposis. ||  || Significant proportions of patients with hamartomatous polyposis or with hyperplastic/mixed polyposis remain without specific clinical and molecular diagnosis or present atypically. Assigning a syndromic diagnosis is important because it guides management, especially surveillance and prophylactic surgery. To systematically classify patients with unexplained hamartomatous or hyperplastic/mixed polyposis by extensive molecular analysis in the context of central rereview of histopathology results. Prospective, referral-based study of 49 unrelated patients from outside institutions (n = 28) and at a comprehensive cancer center (n = 21), conducted from May 2, 2002, until December 15, 2004. Germline analysis of PTEN, BMPR1A, STK11 (sequence, deletion), SMAD4, and ENG (sequence), specific exon screening of BRAF, MYH, and BHD, and rereview of polyp histology results were performed. Molecular, clinical, and histopathological findings in patients with unexplained polyposis. Of the 49 patients, 11 (22%) had germline mutations. Of 14 patients with juvenile polyposis, 2 with early-onset disease had mutations in ENG, encoding endoglin, previously only associated with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia; 1 had hemizygous deletion encompassing PTEN and BMPR1A; and 1 had an SMAD4 mutation. One individual previously classified with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome had a PTEN deletion. Among 9 individuals with an unknown hamartomatous polyposis, 4 had mutations in STK11 (1), BMPR1A (2), and SMAD4 (1). Of the 23 patients with hyperplastic/mixed polyposis, 2 had PTEN mutations. Substantial discrepancies in histopathology results were seen. Systematic molecular classification of 49 patients with unexplained hamartomatous or hyperplastic polyposis uncovered a potential novel susceptibility gene, ENG, for juvenile polyposis. Importantly, given the substantial proportion of patients found to have germline mutations, more extensive analysis of the known susceptibility genes is indicated. Rereview of histology results by a dedicated gastrointestinal pathologist should be considered routinely, as organ-specific surveillance rests on defining syndromic diagnosis.",4
"Identification of 21 novel glucokinase (GCK) mutations in UK and European Caucasians with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). ||  || Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) resulting from mutations in the glucokinase (GCK) gene accounts for approximately 20% of MODY in the UK. We have performed fluorescent single stranded conformation polymorphism (F-SSCP) analysis or direct sequencing of the GCK gene in 212 patients referred as part of a research cohort or for diagnostic molecular genetic testing. Mutation screening has identified 43 different mutations in 61 individuals, of which 21 are novel. This report details the mutations identified and their associated clinical features.",4
"Long-term weight-loss in gastric bypass patients carrying melanocortin 4 receptor variants. || Adolescent Adult Aged Alleles Body Weight Case-Control Studies Female Gastric Bypass Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Obesity Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Postoperative Period Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Time Factors Treatment Outcome Weight Loss Young Adult || The melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) critically regulates feeding and satiety. Rare variants in MC4R are predominantly found in obese individuals. Though some rare variants in MC4R discovered in patients have defects in localization, ligand binding and signaling to cAMP, many have no recognized defects. In our cohort of 1433 obese subjects that underwent Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass (RYGB) surgery, we found fifteen variants of MC4R. We matched rare variant carriers to patients with the MC4R reference alleles for gender, age, starting BMI and T2D to determine the variant effect on weight-loss post-RYGB. In vitro, we determined expression of mutant receptors by ELISA and western blot, and cAMP production by microscopy. While carrying a rare MC4R allele is associated with obesity, carriers of rare variants exhibited comparable weight-loss after RYGB to non-carriers. However, subjects carrying three of these variants, V95I, I137T or L250Q, lost less weight after surgery. In vitro, the R305Q mutation caused a defect in cell surface expression while only the I137T and C326R mutations showed impaired cAMP signaling. Despite these apparent differences, there was no correlation between in vitro signaling and pre- or post-surgery clinical phenotype. These data suggest that subtle differences in receptor signaling conferred by rare MC4R variants combined with additional factors predispose carriers to obesity. In the absence of complete MC4R deficiency, these differences can be overcome by the powerful weight-reducing effects of bariatric surgery. In a complex disorder such as obesity, genetic variants that cause subtle defects that have cumulative effects can be overcome after appropriate clinical intervention.",4 0
"165th ENMC International Workshop: distal myopathies 6-8th February 2009 Naarden, The Netherlands. || Animals Arthrogryposis Autophagy Cardiac Myosins Diagnosis, Differential Disease Models, Animal Distal Myopathies Humans Multienzyme Complexes Muscles Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Phenotype || ",4
"Prevalence of cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene mutations in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Amino Acid Sequence Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genotype Germany Humans Kyrgyzstan Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Poland Prevalence Prospective Studies Risk Factors Sequence Alignment || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a frequent, autosomal-dominant cardiac disease and manifests predominantly as left ventricular hypertrophy. Mutations in the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene (MYH7) are responsible for the disease in about 30% of cases where mutations were identified. We clinically evaluated a large group of 147 consecutive HCM patients from three cardiology centers in Germany, Poland, and Kyrgyzstan according to the same protocol. The DNA of the patients was systematically analyzed in the whole coding region of the MYH7 gene using PCR, single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis, and automated sequencing. Eleven different missense mutations (including seven novel ones) in 11 unrelated patients were identified, showing a mutation frequency of 7.5% in the study population. We further examined the families of five patients (three of German, one of Polish, and one of Kyrgyz origin) with 32 individuals in total. We observed a clear, age-dependent penetrance with onset of disease symptoms in the fourth decade of life. Genotype-phenotype correlations were different for each mutation, whereas the majority was associated with an intermediate/malign phenotype. In conclusion, we report a systematic molecular screening of the complete MYH7 gene in a large group of consecutive HCM patients, leading to a genetic diagnosis in 38 individuals. Information about the genotype in an individual from one family could be very useful for the clinician, especially when dealing with healthy relatives in doubt of their risk about developing HCM. The increasing application of genetic screening and the increasing knowledge about genotype-phenotype correlations will hopefully lead to an improved clinical management of HCM patients.",2 4
"Association of functionally significant Melanocortin-4 but not Melanocortin-3 receptor mutations with severe adult obesity in a large North American case-control study. || Adult Case-Control Studies Cell Line Cohort Studies Computational Biology Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Mutant Proteins Mutation North America Obesity, Morbid Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 3 Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Thinness || Functionally significant heterozygous mutations in the Melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) have been implicated in 2.5% of early onset obesity cases in European cohorts. The role of mutations in this gene in severely obese adults, particularly in smaller North American patient cohorts, has been less convincing. More recently, it has been proposed that mutations in a phylogenetically and physiologically related receptor, the Melanocortin-3 receptor (MC3R), could also be a cause of severe human obesity. The objectives of this study were to determine if mutations impairing the function of MC4R or MC3R were associated with severe obesity in North American adults. We studied MC4R and MC3R mutations detected in a total of 1821 adults (889 severely obese and 932 lean controls) from two cohorts. We systematically and comparatively evaluated the functional consequences of all mutations found in both MC4R and MC3R. The total prevalence of rare MC4R variants in severely obese North American adults was 2.25% (CI(95%): 1.44-3.47) compared with 0.64% (CI(95%): 0.26-1.43) in lean controls (P < 0.005). After classification of functional consequence, the prevalence of MC4R mutations with functional alterations was significantly greater when compared with controls (P < 0.005). In contrast, the prevalence of rare MC3R variants was not significantly increased in severely obese adults [0.67% (CI(95%): 0.27-1.50) versus 0.32% (CI(95%): 0.06-0.99)] (P = 0.332). Our results confirm that mutations in MC4R are a significant cause of severe obesity, extending this finding to North American adults. However, our data suggest that MC3R mutations are not associated with severe obesity in this population.",4 0
"Molecular characterization of Polish patients with familial hypercholesterolemia: novel and recurrent LDLR mutations. || Adolescent Adult Apolipoprotein B-100 Exons Female Gene Rearrangement Genotype Humans Hypercholesterolemia Introns Male Point Mutation Poland Receptors, LDL Young Adult || Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH) is caused by mutations in the genes coding for the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), apolipoprotein B-100 (APOB), or proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9). In this study, a molecular analysis of LDLR and APOB was performed in a group of 378 unrelated ADH patients, to explore the mutation spectrum that causes hypercholesterolemia in Poland. All patients were clinically diagnosed with ADH according to a uniform protocol and internationally accepted WHO criteria. Mutational analysis included all exons, exon-intron boundaries and the promoter sequence of the LDLR, and a fragment of exon 26 of APOB. Additionally, the MLPA technique was applied to detect rearrangements within LDLR. In total, 100 sequence variations were identified in 234 (62%) patients. Within LDLR, 40 novel and 59 previously described sequence variations were detected. Of the 99 LDLR sequence variations, 71 may be pathogenic mutations. The most frequent LDLR alteration was a point mutation p.G592E detected in 38 (10%) patients, followed by duplication of exons 4-8 found in 16 individuals (4.2%). Twenty-five cases (6.6%) demonstrated the p.R3527Q mutation of APOB. Our findings imply that major rearrangements of the LDLR gene as well as 2 point mutations (p.G592E in LDLR and p.R3527Q in APOB) are frequent causes of ADH in Poland. However, the heterogeneity of LDLR mutations detected in the studied group confirms the requirement for complex molecular studies of Polish ADH patients.",4
"Clinical and genetic diagnosis of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: Results in pediatric cardiology. || Adolescent Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Child Child, Preschool Female Genetic Testing Humans Infant Male Pedigree || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is most often of autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance and variable expression. The main purpose of family screening is to identify relatives with unrecognized HCM and to monitor those at risk for disease, in order to minimize complications and to assess risk of sudden cardiac death. The ESC and ACCF/AHA guidelines on the diagnosis and management of HCM recommend the screening of child relatives from the age of 10-12 years. We studied the outcome of clinical screening and genetic testing of child probands and relatives (<18 years of age) from families with HCM and assessed the age-related penetrance of HCM during the follow-up of these young relatives. Twenty patients from ten families were included between 2004 and 2013, consisting of three probands and 17 first-degree relatives (80% male; median age 10 years). Fourteen child relatives were mutation carriers (70%; median age eight years). Seven (50%) of the 14 mutation carriers were diagnosed with HCM at initial assessment. At-risk child relatives were defined as those with a positive mutation but a negative phenotype at enrollment. After 3.5±0.8 years of follow-up, two of the phenotype-negative mutation carriers developed HCM at 10 and 15 years of age (28% penetrance rate). The penetrance of HCM in phenotype-negative child relatives was 28% after 3.5 years of follow-up. This underlines the need for long-term monitoring of mutation carriers irrespective of the presence of a positive phenotype.",4
"Frequent somatic CDH1 loss-of-function mutations in plasmacytoid variant bladder cancer. || Antigens, CD Cadherins Cell Line, Tumor DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Association Studies Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Multivariate Analysis Mutation Plasmacytoma Proportional Hazards Models Urinary Bladder Neoplasms || Plasmacytoid bladder cancer is an aggressive histologic variant with a high risk of disease-specific mortality. Using whole-exome and targeted sequencing, we find that truncating somatic alterations in the CDH1 gene occur in 84% of plasmacytoid carcinomas and are specific to this histologic variant. Consistent with the aggressive clinical behavior of plasmacytoid carcinomas, which frequently recur locally, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout of CDH1 in bladder cancer cells enhanced cell migration.",4
"Mutational analysis in UK patients with a clinical diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolaemia: relationship with plasma lipid traits, heart disease risk and utility in relative tracing. || Cardiovascular Diseases DNA Mutational Analysis England Female Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Lipids Male Middle Aged Pedigree Prevalence Random Allocation Receptors, LDL Risk Factors || As part of a randomised trial [Genetic Risk Assessment for Familial Hypercholesterolaemia (FH) Trial] of the psychological consequences of DNA-based and non-DNA-based diagnosis of FH, 338 probands with a clinical diagnosis of FH (46% with tendon xanthomas) were recruited. In the DNA-based testing arm (245 probands), using single-strand conformation polymorphism of all exons of the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene, 48 different pathogenic mutations were found in 62 probands (25%), while 7 (2.9%) of the patients had the R3500Q mutation in the apolipoprotein B (APOB) gene. Compared to those with no detected mutation, mean untreated cholesterol levels in those with the APOB mutation were similar, while in those with an LDLR mutation levels were significantly higher (None=9.15+/-1.62 vs LDLR=9.13+/-1.16 vs APOB=10.26+/-2.07 mmol/l p<0.001, respectively). Thirty seven percent of the detected mutations were in exon 3/4 of LDLR, and this group had significantly higher untreated cholesterol than those with other LDLR mutations (11.71+/-2.39 mmol/l vs 9.88+/-2.44 mmol/l, p=0.03), and more evidence of coronary disease compared to those with other LDLR or APOB mutations (36 vs 13% p=0.04). Of the probands with a detected mutation, 54 first-degree relatives were identified, of whom 27 (50%) had a mutation. Of these, 18 had untreated cholesterol above the 95th percentile for their age and gender, but there was overlap with levels in the non-carrier relatives such that 12% of subjects would have been incorrectly diagnosed on lipid levels alone. In the non-DNA-based testing arm (82 probands) only 19 of the 74 relatives identified had untreated cholesterol above the 95th percentile for their age and gender, which was significantly lower (p<0.0005) than the 50% expected for monogenic inheritance. These data confirm the genetic heterogeneity of LDLR mutations in the UK and the deleterious effect of mutations in exon 3 or 4 of LDLR on receptor function, lipids and severity of coronary heart disease. In patients with a clinical diagnosis of FH but no detectable mutation, there is weaker evidence for a monogenic cause compared with relatives of probands with LDLR mutations. This supports the usefulness of DNA testing to confirm diagnosis of FH for the treatment of hyperlipidaemia and for further cascade screening.",4
"Alternative splicing in the alpha-galactosidase A gene: increased exon inclusion results in the Fabry cardiac phenotype. || Alternative Splicing Amino Acid Sequence Animals Base Sequence COS Cells Exons Fabry Disease Heart Diseases Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Phenotype RNA, Messenger Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Sequence Alignment alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is an inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism, resulting from deficient activity of lysosomal alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A). A rare alternative splicing that introduces a 57-nucleotide (nt) intronic sequence to the alpha-Gal A transcript from intron 4 of the gene has been identified. In addition, a novel midintronic base substitution that results in substantially increased alternative splicing has been identified in a patient with Fabry disease who has the cardiac variant phenotype. The sequence of the patient's intron 4 contains a single G-->A transversion at genomic nt 9331 (IVS4+919 G-->A ), located at the minus sign4 position of the 3' end of the intronic insertion (nts 9278--9334 in the genomic sequence). Minigene constructs containing the entire intron 4 sequence with G, A, C, or T at nt 9331 within an alpha-Gal A complementary DNA expression vector were prepared and expressed in COS-1 cells. Whereas transfection of the G or T minigenes transcribed predominantly normal-sized transcripts, the transfection of the A or C minigenes produced a large amount of the alternatively spliced transcript. These results suggest that the G-->A mutation, within an A/C-rich domain, results in increased recognition of the alternative splicing by an A/C-rich enhancer-type exonic splicing enhancer. The intronic mutation was not observed in 100 unrelated unaffected men but was present in 6 unrelated patients with cardiac Fabry disease. Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction of total RNA of various normal human tissues revealed that the alternatively spliced transcript was present in all of the samples, and especially at a higher ratio in the lung and muscle. The normal transcript was present in the patients' lymphoblasts and resulted in approximately 10% residual enzyme activity, leading to a cardiac phenotype of Fabry disease.",3 4 0
"Sarcomere mutation-specific expression patterns in human hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Alleles Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Echocardiography Female Gene Expression Regulation Genotype Heterozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Myocardium Proteomics RNA, Messenger Sarcomeres || Heterozygous mutations in sarcomere genes in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) are proposed to exert their effect through gain of function for missense mutations or loss of function for truncating mutations. However, allelic expression from individual mutations has not been sufficiently characterized to support this exclusive distinction in human HCM. Sarcomere transcript and protein levels were analyzed in septal myectomy and transplant specimens from 46 genotyped HCM patients with or without sarcomere gene mutations and 10 control hearts. For truncating mutations in MYBPC3, the average ratio of mutant:wild-type transcripts was ≈1:5, in contrast to ≈1:1 for all sarcomere missense mutations, confirming that nonsense transcripts are uniquely unstable. However, total MYBPC3 mRNA was significantly increased by 9-fold in HCM samples with MYBPC3 mutations compared with control hearts and with HCM samples without sarcomere gene mutations. Full-length MYBPC3 protein content was not different between MYBPC3 mutant HCM and control samples, and no truncated proteins were detected. By absolute quantification of abundance with multiple reaction monitoring, stoichiometric ratios of mutant sarcomere proteins relative to wild type were strikingly variable in a mutation-specific manner, with the fraction of mutant protein ranging from 30% to 84%. These results challenge the concept that haploinsufficiency is a unifying mechanism for HCM caused by MYBPC3 truncating mutations. The range of allelic imbalance for several missense sarcomere mutations suggests that certain mutant proteins may be more or less stable or incorporate more or less efficiently into the sarcomere than wild-type proteins. These mutation-specific properties may distinctly influence disease phenotypes.",4
"Human homozygous R403W mutant cardiac myosin presents disproportionate enhancement of mechanical and enzymatic properties. || Actin Cytoskeleton Adenosine Triphosphatases Adenosine Triphosphate Adolescent Adult Animals Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Carrier Proteins Humans Molecular Motor Proteins Molecular Sequence Data Myosin Heavy Chains Point Mutation Rabbits Sequence Analysis, DNA || Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) is associated with mutations in 11 genes encoding sarcomeric proteins. Most families present mutations in MYBPC3 and MYH7 encoding cardiac myosin-binding protein C and beta-myosin heavy chain. The consequences of MYH7 mutations have been extensively studied at the molecular level, but controversial results have been obtained with either reduced or augmented myosin motor function depending on the type or homogeneity of myosin studied. In the present study, we took advantage of the accessibility to an explanted heart to analyze for the first time the properties of human homozygous mutant myosin. The patient exhibited eccentric hypertrophy with severely impaired ejection fraction leading to heart transplantation, and carries a homozygous mutation in MYH7 (R403W) and a heterozygous variant in MYBPC3 (V896M). In situ analysis of the left ventricular tissue showed myocyte disarray and hypertrophy plus interstitial fibrosis. In vitro motility assays showed a small, but significant increase in sliding velocity of fluorescent-labeled actin filaments over human mutant cardiac myosin-coated surface compared to control (+18%; P<0.001). Mutant myosin exhibited a large increase in maximal actin-activated ATPase activity (+114%; P<0.05) and Km for actin (+87%; P<0.05) when compared to control. These data show disproportionate enhancement of mechanical and enzymatic properties of human mutant myosin. This suggests inefficient ATP utilization and reduced mechanical efficiency in the myocardial tissue of the patient, which could play an important role in the development of FHC phenotype.",4 0
"Utility and limitations of exome sequencing in the molecular diagnosis of pediatric inherited platelet disorders. || Blood Platelet Disorders Child Exome Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Sequence Analysis, DNA || Inherited platelet disorders (IPD) are a heterogeneous group of rare disorders that affect platelet number and function and often predispose to other significant medical complications. In spite of the identification of over 50 IPD disease-associated genes, a molecular diagnosis is only identified in a minority (10%) of affected patients without a clinically suspected etiology. We studied a cohort of 21 pediatric patients with suspected IPDs by exome sequencing (ES) to: (1) examine the performance of the exome test for IPD genes, (2) determine if this exome-wide diagnostic test provided a higher diagnostic yield than has been previously reported, (3) to evaluate the frequency of variants of uncertain significance identified, and (4) to identify candidate variants for functional evaluation in patients with an uncertain or negative diagnosis. We established a high priority gene list of 53 genes, evaluated exome capture kit performance, and determined the coverage for these genes and disease-related variants. We identified likely disease causing variants in 5 of the 21 probands (23.8%) and variants of uncertain significance in 52% of patients studied. In conclusion, ES has the potential to molecularly diagnose causes of IPD, and to identify candidate genes for functional evaluation. Robust exome sequencing also requires that coverage of genes known to be associated with clinical findings of interest need to be carefully examined and supplemented if necessary. Clinicians who undertake ES should understand the limitations of the test and the full significance of results that may be returned.",4
"Panel-based next generation sequencing as a reliable and efficient technique to detect mutations in unselected patients with retinal dystrophies. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Exons Extracellular Matrix Proteins Eye Proteins Genetic Predisposition to Disease High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Mutation Pathology, Molecular Pedigree Retinal Dystrophies Retinitis Pigmentosa Sequence Analysis, DNA Usher Syndromes || Hereditary retinal dystrophies (RD) constitute a group of blinding diseases that are characterized by clinical variability and pronounced genetic heterogeneity. The different forms of RD can be caused by mutations in >100 genes, including >1600 exons. Consequently, next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies are among the most promising approaches to identify mutations in RD. So far, NGS is not routinely used in gene diagnostics. We developed a diagnostic NGS pipeline to identify mutations in 170 genetically and clinically unselected RD patients. NGS was applied to 105 RD-associated genes. Underrepresented regions were examined by Sanger sequencing. The NGS approach was successfully established using cases with known sequence alterations. Depending on the initial clinical diagnosis, we identified likely causative mutations in 55% of retinitis pigmentosa and 80% of Bardet-Biedl or Usher syndrome cases. Seventy-one novel mutations in 40 genes were newly associated with RD. The genes USH2A, EYS, ABCA4, and RHO were more frequently affected than others. Occasionally, cases carried mutations in more than one RD-associated gene. In addition, we found possible dominant de-novo mutations in cases with sporadic RD, which implies consequences for counseling of patients and families. NGS-based mutation analyses are reliable and cost-efficient approaches in gene diagnostics of genetically heterogeneous diseases like RD.",1 4
"Inheritance patterns and phenotypic features of myofibrillar myopathy associated with a BAG3 mutation. || Actin Cytoskeleton Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adolescent Adult Apoptosis Regulatory Proteins Child DNA Mutational Analysis Family Health Female Genotype Humans Leucine Male Microscopy, Electron, Scanning Muscular Diseases Mutation Phenotype Proline Sural Nerve Young Adult || Myofibrillar myopathies are a heterogeneous group of neuromuscular disorders characterized by disintegration of myofibrils. The inheritance pattern is commonly autosomal dominant, but there has been a striking absence of secondary cases noted in a BAG3-associated subtype. We studied three families with BAG3 p.Pro209Leu mutation showing a severe phenotype of myofibrillar myopathy and axonal neuropathy with giant axons. In one family, transmission to a pair of siblings has occurred from their asymptomatic father who showed somatic mosaicism. In two other families, neither of the parents was affected or showed detectable level of somatic mosaicism. These observations suggest that the BAG3 variant of myofibrillar myopathy may result from a spontaneous mutation at an early point of embryonic development and that transmission from a mosaic parent may occur more than once. The study underlines the importance of parental evaluation as it may have implications for genetic counseling.",4
"Genetic analysis in 418 index patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy: overview of 10 years' experience. || Dilated cardiomyopathy Genetic analysis Genetics Heart failure || With more than 40 dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)-related genes known, genetic analysis of patients with idiopathic DCM is costly and time-consuming. We describe the yield from genetic analysis in DCM patients in a large Dutch cohort. We collected cardiological and neurological evaluations, family screenings, and genetic analyses for 418 index patients with idiopathic DCM. We identified 35 (putative) pathogenic mutations in 82 index patients (20%). The type of DCM influenced the yield, with mutations found in 25% of familial DCM cases, compared with 8% of sporadic DCM cases and 62% of cases where DCM was accompanied by neuromuscular disease. A PLN founder mutation (43 cases) and LMNA mutations (19 cases, 16 different mutations) were most prevalent and often demonstrated a specific phenotype. Other mutations were found in: MYH7, DES, TNNT2, DMD, TPM1, DMPK, SCN5A, SGCB (homozygous), and TNNI3. After a median follow-up of 40 months, the combined outcome of death from any cause, heart transplantation, or malignant ventricular arrhythmias in patients with a mutation was worse than in those without an identified mutation (hazard ratio 2.0, 95% confidence interval 1.4-3.0). This seems to be mainly attributable to a high prevalence of malignant ventricular arrhythmias and end-stage heart failure in LMNA and PLN mutation carriers. The yield of identified mutations in DCM index patients with clinical clues, such as associated neuromuscular disease or familial occurrence, is higher compared with those without these clues. For sporadic DCM, specific clinical characteristics may be used to select cases for DNA analysis.",4
"Comprehensive Rare Variant Analysis via Whole-Genome Sequencing to Determine the Molecular Pathology of Inherited Retinal Disease. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Alleles Base Sequence Choroideremia DNA Mutational Analysis Ethnic Groups Exome Female Genes, Recessive Genetic Variation Genome, Human Humans Introns Male Mutation Rare Diseases Retinal Diseases || Inherited retinal disease is a common cause of visual impairment and represents a highly heterogeneous group of conditions. Here, we present findings from a cohort of 722 individuals with inherited retinal disease, who have had whole-genome sequencing (n = 605), whole-exome sequencing (n = 72), or both (n = 45) performed, as part of the NIHR-BioResource Rare Diseases research study. We identified pathogenic variants (single-nucleotide variants, indels, or structural variants) for 404/722 (56%) individuals. Whole-genome sequencing gives unprecedented power to detect three categories of pathogenic variants in particular: structural variants, variants in GC-rich regions, which have significantly improved coverage compared to whole-exome sequencing, and variants in non-coding regulatory regions. In addition to previously reported pathogenic regulatory variants, we have identified a previously unreported pathogenic intronic variant in CHM in two males with choroideremia. We have also identified 19 genes not previously known to be associated with inherited retinal disease, which harbor biallelic predicted protein-truncating variants in unsolved cases. Whole-genome sequencing is an increasingly important comprehensive method with which to investigate the genetic causes of inherited retinal disease.",3 1 4
"Differences in clinical expression of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated with two distinct mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene. A 908Leu----Val mutation and a 403Arg----Gln mutation. || Adolescent Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Blotting, Southern Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14 Death, Sudden, Cardiac Echocardiography Electrocardiography Female Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Myosins Pedigree Polymerase Chain Reaction || The disease gene for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) has been identified as the beta-myosin heavy chain (beta-MHC) gene in some HCM families. We describe extensive clinical evaluations in two kindreds with two distinct point mutations in the beta-MHC gene. We used single-strand confirmation polymorphism (SSCP) gel analysis of polymerase chain reaction-amplified products capturing each of the 40 beta-MHC gene exons to identify distinct missense mutations in two HCM kindreds. Clinical, ECG, and echocardiographic studies were performed in the two kindreds: kindred 2755 with amino acid 908Leu----Val mutation and kindred 2002 with amino acid 403Arg----Gln mutation. The morphological appearances of HCM were similar in these two kindreds. However, the two kindreds differed with respect to disease penetrance, age of onset of disease, and incidence of premature sudden death. Twelve of 31 adults (greater than or equal to 17 years) with the disease gene in kindred 2755 did not have left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), and only five of these had ECG abnormalities. Thus, the disease penetrance in adults with this mutation was only 61%. None of 11 children aged less than 16 years had LVH. The 908 mutation was associated with a low incidence of cardiac events: Only two sudden deaths and one syncope occurred in 46 individuals with the mutant allele. In contrast, LVH was present in all 11 adults in kindred 2002 with the 403 mutation (100% disease penetrance). In addition, three of four affected children were symptomatic and had clinical evidence of HCM. The disease in this kindred was severe and resulted in six premature sudden deaths. Seven additional patients had syncope or presyncope. In some kindreds, the HCM disease gene is more prevalent than indicated by echocardiography and ECG. Some point mutations may be associated with a more malignant prognosis. Preclinical identification of children with mutations associated with a high incidence of sudden death and syncope provides the opportunity to evaluate efficacy of early therapeutic interventions.",2 4
"Microfluidic amplification as a tool for massive parallel sequencing of the familial hypercholesterolemia genes. || Apolipoproteins B Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Microfluidic Analytical Techniques Mutation Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Polymerase Chain Reaction Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Receptors, LDL Sequence Analysis, DNA Serine Endopeptidases || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disorder that affects cholesterol metabolism and is an important risk factor for heart disease. Three different genes were causally linked to this disorder: LDLR (low density lipoprotein receptor), APOB [apolipoprotein B (including Ag(x) antigen)], and PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9). We evaluated a new amplicon preparation tool for resequencing these genes on next generation sequencing (NGS) platforms. For the 3 genes, 38 primer pairs were designed and loaded on the Fluidigm Access Array, a microfluidic array in which a PCR was performed. We amplified 144 DNA samples (73 positive controls and 71 patient samples) and performed 3 sequencing runs on a GS FLX Titanium system from Roche 454, using pyrosequencing. Data were analyzed with the SeqNext module of the Sequence Pilot software. From the 38 amplicons, 37 were amplified successfully, without any further optimization. Sequencing resulted in a mean coverage of the individual amplicons of 71-fold, 74-fold, and 117-fold for the 3 runs, respectively. In the positive controls, all known mutations were identified. In 29% of the patient samples, a pathogenic point mutation or small deletion/insertion was found. Large rearrangements were not detectable with NGS, but were picked up by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. Combining a microfluidic amplification system with massive parallel sequencing is an effective method for mutation scanning in FH patients, which can be implemented in diagnostics. For data analysis, we propose a minimum variant frequency threshold of 20% and a minimum coverage of 25-fold.",4
"Pathogenic and likely pathogenic variant prevalence among the first 10,000 patients referred for next-generation cancer panel testing. || Adult Aged Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Middle Aged Neoplasms Prevalence Sequence Analysis, DNA || Germ-line testing for panels of cancer genes using next-generation sequencing is becoming more common in clinical care. We report our experience as a clinical laboratory testing both well-established, high-risk cancer genes (e.g., BRCA1/2, MLH1, MSH2) as well as more recently identified cancer genes (e.g., PALB2, BRIP1), many of which have increased but less well-defined penetrance. Clinical genetic testing was performed on over 10,000 consecutive cases referred for evaluation of germ-line cancer genes, and results were analyzed for frequency of pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants, and were stratified by testing panel, gene, and clinical history. Overall, a molecular diagnosis was made in 9.0% of patients tested, with the highest yield in the Lynch syndrome/colorectal cancer panel. In patients with breast, ovarian, or colon/stomach cancer, positive yields were 9.7, 13.4, and 14.8%, respectively. Approximately half of the pathogenic variants identified in patients with breast or ovarian cancer were in genes other than BRCA1/2. The high frequency of positive results in a wide range of cancer genes, including those of high penetrance and with clinical care guidelines, underscores both the genetic heterogeneity of hereditary cancer and the usefulness of multigene panels over genetic tests of one or two genes.Genet Med 18 8, 823-832.",4
"The prevalence of germ-line TP53 mutations in women diagnosed with breast cancer before age 30. || Adult Age of Onset Breast Neoplasms DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Pedigree Prevalence Young Adult || Germ-line mutations in the TP53 gene are rare, but predispose women to a range of cancer types, including early-onset breast cancer. Breast cancers in women from families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome often occur before age 30. The prevalence of deleterious TP53 mutations in unselected women with early-onset breast cancer is not precisely known. If mutations were found to be sufficiently common, it might be prudent to offer genetic testing to affected women in this age group. We screened the entire TP53 gene in the germ-line DNA from 95 women of various ethnic groups who were diagnosed with breast cancer before age 30, and who had previously been found to be negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. No TP53 mutation was found. This study does not support a policy that TP53 testing should be offered routinely to unselected women with early-onset breast cancer in the absence of a family history of cancer.",4
"Compound and double mutations in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: implications for genetic testing and counselling. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Cohort Studies Female Genetic Counseling Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Middle Aged Molecular Diagnostic Techniques Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Sequence Analysis, DNA || To report the frequency of single and multiple gene mutations in an Australian cohort of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Genetic screening of seven HCM genes (beta-MHC, MyBP-C, cTnT, cTnI, ACTC, MYL2, and MYL3) was undertaken in 80 unrelated probands. Screening was by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography and direct DNA sequencing. Clinical data were collected on all patients and on genotyped family members. 26 mutations were identified in 23 families (29%). Nineteen probands (24%) had single mutations (11 beta-MHC, 4 MyBP-C, 3 cTnI, 1 cTnT). Multiple gene mutations were identified in four probands (5%): one had a double mutation and the others had compound mutations. Six of 14 affected individuals from multiple mutation families (43%) experienced a sudden cardiac death event, compared with 10 of 55 affected members (18%) from single mutation families (p = 0.05). There was an increase in septal wall thickness in patients with compound mutations (mean (SD): 30.7 (3.1) v 24.4 (7.4) mm; p<0.05). Multiple gene mutations occurring in HCM families may result in a more severe clinical phenotype because of a ""double dose"" effect. This highlights the importance of screening the entire panel of HCM genes even after a single mutation has been identified.",2 4
"Identification of circulating microRNAs in HNF1A-MODY carriers. || Animals Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Frameshift Mutation Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Insulinoma MicroRNAs Rats Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction T Cell Transcription Factor 1 || HNF1A-MODY is a monogenic form of diabetes caused by mutations in the HNF1A gene. Here we identify, for the first time, HNF1A-MODY-associated microRNAs (miRNAs) that can be detected in the serum of HNF1A-MODY carriers. An miRNA array was carried out in rat INS-1 insulinoma cells inducibly expressing the common human Pro291fsinsC-HNF1A frame shift mutation. Differentially expressed miRNAs were validated by quantitative real-time PCR. Expression of miRNAs in the serum of HNF1A-MODY carriers (n = 31), MODY-negative family members (n = 10) and individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus (n = 17) was quantified by absolute real-time PCR analysis. Inducible expression of Pro291fsinsC-HNF1A in INS-1 cells caused a significant upregulation of three miRNAs (miR-103, miR-224, miR-292-3p). The differential expression of two miRNAs (miR-103 and miR-224) was validated in vitro. Strongly elevated levels of miR-103 and miR-224 could be detected in the serum of HNF1A-MODY carriers compared with MODY-negative family controls. Serum levels of miR-103 distinguished HNF1A-MODY carriers from HbA1c-matched individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Our study demonstrates that the pathophysiology of HNF1A-MODY is associated with the overexpression of miR-103 and miR-224. Furthermore, our study demonstrates that these miRNAs can be readily detected in the serum of HNF1A-MODY carriers.",4
"Identification of seven novel germline mutations in the human E-cadherin (CDH1) gene. ||  || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is a cancer predisposition syndrome caused by germline mutation of the gene encoding the tumour-suppressor E-cadherin (CDH1). We describe the search for CDH1 mutations in 36 new diffuse gastric cancer families. All 16 CDH1 exons, neighbouring intronic sequence and an essential promoter region were screened by DNA sequencing. We detected nine different mutations, seven of which were novel. Of the seven novel mutations, five were identified in families who met the IGCLC clinical criteria for HDGC. Two mutations resulted in a premature stop codon and truncation of the protein. Three mutations affected splice sites; two of the splice-site mutations were shown by RT-PCR to disturb normal CDH1 splicing, while the third splice-site mutation was present in two unrelated HDGC families. The remaining two mutations resulted in amino acid substitutions and impaired the ability of E-cadherin protein to form cellular aggregates and suppress invasion in vitro. Together with the occurrence of extra-gastric tumours such as lobular breast and colorectal cancer, these findings further extend the types of CDH1 mutations and the spectrum of tumours associated with HDGC.",2 4 0 3
"Detection of mutations in symptomatic patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in Taiwan. || Adult Aged Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Female Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Sequence Analysis, DNA Taiwan Troponin T || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a common genetic cardiac disorder associated with sudden death, heart failure, and stroke. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the prevalence and types of mutations in symptomatic patients with HCM in Taiwan. Thirty-eight HCM index patients (mean age 60±16 years) underwent systematic mutation screening of eight sarcomeric genes: β-myosin heavy chain (MYH7), myosin-binding protein C (MYBPC3), troponin T (TNNT2), troponin I (TNNI3), myosin ventricular regulatory light chain 2 (MYL2), myosin ventricular essential light chain 1 (MYL3), α-tropomyosin (TPM1), and cardiac α-actin (ACTC), using direct DNA sequencing. In silico programs predicted damaging amino acids. In the positive families, genotype-phenotype correlation studies were done. Overall, 13 mutations were identified in 13 index patients (34.2%). The three most frequently mutated genes were MYH7, MYBPC3, and TNNT2. One patient carried double mutations. Five mutations (MYH7 R147S; MYBPC3 R597Q; MYBPC3 W1007R; TNNI3 E124Q; MYL3 R63C) were novel; all were missense mutations. Analysis using in silico tools showed near consensus to classify these five novel mutations as pathological. Family pedigree analysis showed the presence of cosegregation in at least two affected members in each proband family, but incomplete penetrance in young family members with a positive genotype. We identified 13 HCM pedigrees, including 5 carrying novel mutations and 1 with a double mutation. The three most commonly mutated genes were MYH7, MYBPC3, and TNNT2. These results, together with genetic counseling, could lead to earlier diagnosis and better management of family members at risk of HCM.",4
"Identification of HNF1A-MODY and HNF4A-MODY in Irish families: phenotypic characteristics and therapeutic implications. || Adolescent Adult Case-Control Studies Child Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4 Humans Ireland Male Middle Aged Mutation Obesity Phenotype Prevalence Young Adult || The prevalence of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1A and HNF4A mutations, and the clinical implications following the genetic diagnosis of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) in the Irish population, remain unknown. The aim of this study was to establish the occurrence of HNF1A and HNF4A mutations in subjects classified clinically as MODY to identify novel mutations, and to determine the phenotypic features and response to therapy. A total of 36 unrelated index cases with a clinical diagnosis of MODY were analyzed for HNF1A/HNF4A mutations. OGTT was performed to determine the degree of glucose tolerance and insulin secretory response. Also, 38 relatives underwent OGTT and were tested for the relevant known mutations. HNF1A-/HNF4A-MODY subjects were compared with nine HNF1A mutation-negative relatives and 20 type 2 diabetic (T2DM) patients. Seven different HNF1A mutations were identified in 11/36 (30.5%) index cases, two of which were novel (S352fsdelG and F426X), as well as two novel HNF4A mutations (M1? and R290C; 6%). Family screening revealed 20 subjects with HNF1A and seven with HNF4A mutations. Only 51.6% of HNF1A mutation carriers were diagnosed with diabetes by age 25 years; 11 of the mutation carriers were overweight and four were obese. Insulin secretory response to glucose was significantly lower in HNF1A-MODY subjects than in T2DM patients and HNF1A mutation-negative relatives (P=0.01). Therapeutic changes occurred in 48% of mutation carriers following genetic diagnosis. There was an HNF1A-MODY pick-up rate of 30.5% and an HNF4A-MODY pick-up rate of 6% in Irish MODY families. Genetically confirmed MODY has significant therapeutic implications.",4
"Intracellular retention is a common characteristic of childhood obesity-associated MC4R mutations. || Amino Acid Sequence Cell Line Cell Membrane Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Female Gene Expression Genetic Variation Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Obesity Pedigree Prevalence Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Corticotropin Transfection || Heterozygous mutations in the coding region of the serpentine Melanocortin 4 receptor are the most common genetic cause of human obesity described to date. There are still conflicting data regarding the overall prevalence of such mutations in obesity and limited information is available on the functional defects caused by most obesity-associated MC4R mutations. We report here the screening for mutations in the coding region of the MC4R of a new cohort of 172 patients presenting with severe childhood obesity and a family history of obesity. Three heterozygous MC4R mutations (Ser127Leu, Ala244Glu and Pro299His) were found in three patients of this cohort (1.74%), confirming that such mutations are implicated in a significant number of childhood obesity cases. A functional analysis of these mutant receptors, in addition to 11 other childhood obesity-associated MC4R mutations, indicates that they all alter the activation of the receptor by the endogenous agonist alpha-MSH. To further examine the functional defects caused by childhood obesity-associated MC4R mutations, we developed a novel, sensitive technique to quantitatively analyze the effect of a mutation on MC4R cell surface expression. Using this method we analyzed the cell surface expression of all the 14 described childhood obesity-associated MC4R missense mutations. We demonstrate that 81.3% of childhood obesity-associated heterozygous MC4R mutations lead to intracellular retention of the receptor. This result has implications for the potential pharmacologic rescue of childhood obesity-associated MC4R mutations and for the treatment of patients presenting with this condition.",4 0
"Monogenic diabetes in overweight and obese youth diagnosed with type 2 diabetes: the TODAY clinical trial. || Adolescent Body Mass Index Child Cohort Studies Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4 Humans Male Obesity Overweight Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases || PurposeMonogenic diabetes accounts for 1-2% of diabetes cases. It is often undiagnosed, which may lead to inappropriate treatment. This study was performed to estimate the prevalence of monogenic diabetes in a cohort of overweight/obese adolescents diagnosed with type 2 diabetes (T2D).MethodsSequencing using a custom monogenic diabetes gene panel was performed on a racially/ethnically diverse cohort of 488 overweight/obese adolescents with T2D in the Treatment Options for Type 2 Diabetes in Adolescents and Youth (TODAY) clinical trial. Associations between having a monogenic diabetes variant and clinical characteristics and time to treatment failure were analyzed.ResultsMore than 4% (22/488) had genetic variants causing monogenic diabetes (seven GCK, seven HNF4A, five HNF1A, two INS, and one KLF11). Patients with monogenic diabetes had a statistically, but not clinically, significant lower body mass index (BMI) z-score, lower fasting insulin, and higher fasting glucose. Most (6/7) patients with HNF4A variants rapidly failed TODAY treatment across study arms (hazard ratio = 5.03, P = 0.0002), while none with GCK variants failed treatment.ConclusionThe finding of 4.5% of patients with monogenic diabetes in an overweight/obese cohort of children and adolescents with T2D suggests that monogenic diabetes diagnosis should be considered in children and adolescents without diabetes-associated autoantibodies and maintained C-peptide, regardless of BMI, as it may direct appropriate clinical management.",4
"Rapid detection of genetic variants in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy by custom DNA resequencing array in clinical practice. || Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Genetic Variation Heterozygote Humans Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Professional Practice Sequence Analysis, DNA || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common inherited cardiac disease (1/500) and the most common cause of sudden cardiac death in young people. Pathogenic mutation detection of HCM is having a growing impact on the medical management of patients and their families. However, the remarkable genetic and allelic heterogeneity makes molecular analysis by conventional methods very time-consuming, expensive and difficult to realise in a routine diagnostic molecular laboratory. The authors used their custom DNA resequencing array which interrogates all possible single-nucleotide variants on both strands of all exons (n=160), splice sites and 5'-untranslated region of 12 HCM genes (27 000 nucleotides). The results for 122 unrelated patients with HCM are presented. Thirty-three known or novel potentially pathogenic heterozygous single-nucleotide variants were identified in 38 patients (31%) in genes MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNT2, TNNI3, TPM1, MYL3 and ACTC1. Although next-generation sequencing will replace all large-scale sequencing platforms for inherited cardiac disorders in the near future, this HCM resequencing array is currently the most rapid, cost-effective and reasonably efficient technology for first-tier mutation screening of HCM in clinical practice. Because of its design, the array is also an appropriate tool for initial screening of other inherited forms of cardiomyopathy.",4
"Are there low-penetrance TP53 Alleles? evidence from childhood adrenocortical tumors. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adolescent Adrenal Cortex Neoplasms Adult Age of Onset Aged Alleles Carrier Proteins Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis DNA-Binding Proteins Female Genes, p53 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Humans Immunohistochemistry Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Loss of Heterozygosity Male Microsatellite Repeats Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data MutL Protein Homolog 1 MutS Homolog 2 Protein Neoplasm Proteins Nuclear Proteins Penetrance Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Proto-Oncogene Proteins || We have analyzed a panel of 14 cases of childhood adrenocortical tumors unselected for family history and have identified germline TP53 mutations in >80%, making this the highest known incidence of a germline mutation in a tumor-suppressor gene in any cancer. The spectrum of germline TP53 mutations detected is remarkably limited. Analysis of tumor tissue for loss of constitutional heterozygosity, with respect to the germline mutant allele and the occurrence of other somatic TP53 mutations, indicates complex sequences of genetic events in a number of tumors. None of the families had cancer histories that conformed to the criteria for Li-Fraumeni syndrome, but, in some families, we were able to demonstrate that the mutation had been inherited. In these families there were gene carriers unaffected in their 40s and 50s, and there were others with relatively late-onset cancers. These data provide evidence that certain TP53 alleles confer relatively low penetrance for predisposition to the development of cancer, and they imply that deleterious TP53 mutations may be more frequent in the population than has been estimated previously. Our findings have considerable implications for the clinical management of children with andrenocortical tumors and their parents, in terms of both genetic testing and the early detection and treatment of tumors.",4
"Spectrum of mutations of the LPL gene identified in Italy in patients with severe hypertriglyceridemia. || Adolescent Adult Aged Biomarkers Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type I Infant Italy Lipoprotein Lipase Male Middle Aged Mutation Pancreatitis Phenotype Severity of Illness Index Tertiary Care Centers Triglycerides Young Adult || Monogenic hypertriglyceridemia (HTG) may result from mutations in some genes which impair the intravascular lipolysis of triglyceride (TG)-rich lipoproteins mediated by the enzyme Lipoprotein lipase (LPL). Mutations in the LPL gene are the most frequent cause of monogenic HTG (familial chylomicronemia) with recessive transmission. The LPL gene was resequenced in 149 patients with severe HTG (TG > 10 mmol/L) and 106 patients with moderate HTG (TG > 4.5 and <10 mmol/L) referred to tertiary Lipid Clinics in Italy. In the group of severe HTG, 26 patients (17.4%) were homozygotes, 9 patients (6%) were compound heterozygotes and 15 patients (10%) were simple heterozygotes for rare LPL gene variants. Single or multiple episodes of pancreatitis were recorded in 24 (48%) of these patients. There was no difference in plasma TG concentration between patients with or without a positive history of pancreatitis. Among moderate HTG patients, six patients (5.6%) were heterozygotes for rare LPL variants; two of them had suffered from pancreatitis. Overall 36 rare LPL variants were found, 15 of which not reported previously. Systematic analysis of close relatives of mutation carriers led to the identification of 44 simple heterozygotes (plasma TG 3.2 ± 4.1 mmol/L), none of whom had a positive history of pancreatitis. The prevalence of rare LPL variants in patients with severe or moderate HTG, referred to tertiary lipid clinics, was 50/149 (33.5%) and 6/106 (5.6%), respectively. Systematic analysis of relatives of mutation carriers is an efficient way to identify heterozygotes who may develop severe HTG.",4
"Identification of eleven novel tumor-associated E-cadherin mutations. Mutations in brief no. 215. Online. ||  || The cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin (CDH1; MIM# 192090) has been implicated in numerous cellular functions, ranging from controlling morphogenesis to suppressing tumor invasion. We describe 11 previously unreported somatic E-cadherin mutations in two subgroups of gastric and breast cancer showing markedly reduced homophilic cell-to-cell interactions. Using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and direct sequencing of the entire coding region 5 mutations were detected in diffuse-type gastric cancer specimens. The sequence alterations include 3 missense mutations affecting exons 3, 10, and 12. Furthermore, two in-frame deletions were identified removing 63 and 9 base pairs from exon 4 and 5, respectively. In invasive Lobular breast cancer 6 E-cadherin mutations were detected after RT-PCR amplification and direct sequencing or using single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis followed by sequencing. In addition to two nonsense mutations affecting exon 2, four out-of-frame deletions removing 115 base pairs (entire exon 2), 224 base pairs (entire exon 3), 8 base pairs from exon 12 or 1 base pair from exon 13 were seen. Our report confirms the general principle that in diffuse-type gastric cancer E-cadherin mutations result in structurally altered proteins with possible reduced adhesive functions whereas in invasive lobular breast carcinomas complete loss-of-function mutations are characteristic.",4
"Cross-reactive immunologic material status affects treatment outcomes in Pompe disease infants. || Cross Reactions Enzyme Replacement Therapy Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay Female Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Immunoglobulin G Infant Male Muscle Strength Recombinant Proteins Retrospective Studies Treatment Outcome alpha-Galactosidase || Deficiency of acid alpha glucosidase (GAA) causes Pompe disease, which is usually fatal if onset occurs in infancy. Patients synthesize a non-functional form of GAA or are unable to form native enzyme. Enzyme replacement therapy with recombinant human GAA (rhGAA) prolongs survival in infantile Pompe patients but may be less effective in cross-reactive immunologic material (CRIM)-negative patients. We retrospectively analyzed the influence of CRIM status on outcome in 21 CRIM-positive and 11 CRIM-negative infantile Pompe patients receiving rhGAA. Patients were from the clinical setting and from clinical trials of rhGAA, were 6 months of age, were not invasively ventilated, and were treated with IV rhGAA at a cumulative or total dose of 20 or 40 mg/kg/2 weeks. Outcome measures included survival, invasive ventilator-free survival, cardiac status, gross motor development, development of antibodies to rhGAA, and levels of urinary Glc(4). Following 52 weeks of treatment, 6/11 (54.5%) CRIM-negative and 1/21 (4.8%) CRIM-positive patients were deceased or invasively ventilated (p<0.0001). By age 27.1 months, all CRIM-negative patients and 4/21 (19.0%) CRIM-positive patients were deceased or invasively ventilated. Cardiac function and gross motor development improved significantly more in the CRIM-positive group. IgG antibodies to rhGAA developed earlier and serotiters were higher and more sustained in the CRIM-negative group. CRIM-negative status predicted reduced overall survival and invasive ventilator-free survival and poorer clinical outcomes in infants with Pompe disease treated with rhGAA. The effect of CRIM status on outcome appears to be mediated by antibody responses to the exogenous protein.",3 1 4
"Array-based resequencing assay for mutations causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Heterozygote Humans Myosin Heavy Chains Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Sequence Analysis, DNA Troponin T || Dissecting the complex genetic basis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) may be key to both better understanding and optimally managing this most prevalent genetic cardiovascular disease. An array-based resequencing (ABR) assay was developed to facilitate genetic testing in HCM. An Affymetrix resequencing array and a single long-range PCR protocol were developed to cover the 3 most commonly affected genes in HCM, MYH7 (myosin, heavy chain 7, cardiac muscle, beta), MYBPC3 (myosin binding protein C, cardiac), and TNNT2 [troponin T type 2 (cardiac)]. The assay detected the underlying point mutation in 23 of 24 reference samples and provided pointers toward identifying a G insertion and a 3-bp deletion. The comparability of array-based assay results to conventional capillary sequencing was > or =99.9%. Both techniques detected 1 heterozygous variant that was missed by the other method. The data provide evidence that ABR can substantially reduce the high workload previously associated with a genetic test for HCM. Therefore, the HCM array could facilitate large-scale studies aimed at broadening the understanding of the genetic and phenotypic diversity of HCM and related cardiomyopathies.",4
"BAG3-related myopathy, polyneuropathy and cardiomyopathy with long QT syndrome. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adolescent Apoptosis Regulatory Proteins Cardiomyopathies Female Humans Long QT Syndrome Muscle, Skeletal Muscular Diseases Mutation Polyneuropathies || BAG3 belongs to BAG family of molecular chaperone regulators interacting with HSP70 and anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2. It is ubiquitously expressed with strong expression in skeletal and cardiac muscle, and is involved in a panoply of cellular processes. Mutations in BAG3 and aberrations in its expression cause fulminant myopathies, presenting with progressive limb and axial muscle weakness, and respiratory insufficiency and neuropathy. Herein, we report a sporadic case of a 15-years old girl with symptoms of myopathy, demyelinating polyneuropathy and asymptomatic long QT syndrome. Genetic testing demonstrated heterozygous mutation Pro209Leu (c.626C > T) in exon 3 of BAG3 gene causing severe myopathy and neuropathy, often associated with restrictive cardiomyopathy. We did not find a mutation in any known LQT syndrome genes. Analysis of muscle biopsy revealed profound disintegration of Z-discs with extensive accumulation of granular debris and large inclusions within fibers. We demonstrated profound alterations in BAG3 distribution as the protein localized to long filamentous structures present across the fibers that were positively stained not only for α-actinin but also for desmin and filamin indicating that those disintegrated Z-disc regions contained also other sarcomeric proteins. The mutation caused a decrease in the content of BAG3 and HSP70, and also of α-actinin desmin, filamin and fast myosin heavy chain, confirming its severe effect on the muscle fiber morphology and thus function. We provide further evidence that BAG3 is associated with Z-disc maintenance, and the Pro209Leu mutation may occur worldwide. We also provide a summary of cases associated with this mutation reported so far.",4
"Myosin binding protein C mutations and compound heterozygosity in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Child Child, Preschool Exons Family Health Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Heterozygote Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Middle Aged Minnesota Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Sarcomeres Statistics as Topic Troponin I Troponin T || We sought to determine the frequency and phenotype of mutations in myosin binding protein C (MYBPC3) in a large outpatient cohort of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) seen at our tertiary referral center. Mutations in MYBPC3 are one of the most frequent genetic causes of HCM and have been associated with variable onset of disease and prognosis. However, the frequency of mutations and associated clinical presentation have not been established in a large, unrelated cohort of patients. Using deoxyribonucleic acid from 389 unrelated patients with HCM, each protein coding exon of MYBPC3 was analyzed for mutations by polymerase chain reaction, denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography, and direct deoxyribonucleic acid sequencing. Clinical data were extracted from patient records blinded to patient genotype. Of 389 patients with HCM, 71 (18%) had mutations in MYBPC3. In all, 46 mutations were identified, 33 of which were novel (72%). Patients with MYBPC3 mutations did not differ significantly from patients with thick filament-HCM, thin filament-HCM, or genotype-negative HCM with respect to age at diagnosis, degree of hypertrophy, incidence of myectomy, or family history of HCM or sudden death. Patients with multiple mutations (n = 10, 2.6%) had the most severe disease presentation. This study defines the frequency and associated phenotype for MYBPC3 and/or multiple mutations in HCM in the largest cohort to date. In this cohort, unrelated patients with MYBPC3-HCM virtually mimicked the phenotype of those with mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain. Patients with multiple mutations had the most severe phenotype.",4
"Phenotypes in three pedigrees with autosomal dominant obesity caused by haploinsufficiency mutations in the melanocortin-4 receptor gene. || Adolescent Age Factors Aged Aged, 80 and over Body Constitution Body Mass Index Child Codon, Terminator Female Genes, Dominant Germany Heterozygote Humans Leptin Lod Score Male Middle Aged Mutation Obesity Pedigree Penetrance Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Peptide Sex Factors || Recently, haploinsufficiency mutations in the melanocortin-4 receptor gene (MC4-R) were detected which were assumed to lead to the phenotype of extreme obesity. Previously, we detected three obese carriers among 306 index patients. Here we describe the detection of one haploinsufficiency carrier in an additional study group of 186 obese individuals. We subsequently genotyped and phenotyped 43 family members of these four index patients, two of whom were second-degree cousins. A total of 19 carriers were identified. Extreme obesity was the predominating phenotype. However, moderate obesity occurred in three of the carriers. No other specific phenotypic abnormalities were detected. Female haploinsufficiency carriers were heavier than male carriers in the respective families, a finding similar to findings in MC4-R-knockout mice. In conclusion, our data fully support the etiologic role of MC4-R haploinsufficiency mutations in obesity.",2 4
"A large cohort study of GJB2 mutations in Japanese hearing loss patients. || Asian Continental Ancestry Group Audiometry Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Connexin 26 Connexins Gene Frequency Hearing Loss Hearing Loss, Sensorineural Humans Infant Mutation || GJB2 is the gene most frequently associated with hereditary hearing loss, and the GJB2 mutation spectrums vary among different ethnic groups. In this study, the mutation spectrum as well as clinical features of patients with GJB2 mutations as found in more than 1000 Japanese hearing loss families are summarized. The present results show that the frequency of GJB2 mutations in the Japanese population with hearing loss is 14.2% overall and 25.2% in patients with congenital hearing loss. c.235delC was the most frequent allele (49.8%), was associated with a more severe phenotype, and was mainly found in patients who were diagnosed by the age of 3. In contrast, the second most frequent was p.V37I (16.5%), which has a milder phenotype and was mainly found in patients diagnosed at a higher age. Additional clinical features in hearing loss patients with GJB2 mutations in this study were the near absence of tinnitus, vestibular dysfunction and inner ear malformations.",4
"The molecular phenotype of human cardiac myosin associated with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. || Actin Cytoskeleton Adult Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Genotype Heart Failure Humans Middle Aged Muscle Contraction Mutation Myocytes, Cardiac Myosin Heavy Chains Myosin Light Chains Phenotype Phosphorylation Young Adult || The aim of the study was to compare the functional and structural properties of the motor protein, myosin, and isolated myocyte contractility in heart muscle excised from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients by surgical myectomy with explanted failing heart and non-failing donor heart muscle. Myosin was isolated and studied using an in vitro motility assay. The distribution of myosin light chain-1 isoforms was measured by two-dimensional electrophoresis. Myosin light chain-2 phosphorylation was measured by sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis using Pro-Q Diamond phosphoprotein stain. The fraction of actin filaments moving when powered by myectomy myosin was 21% less than with donor myosin (P = 0.006), whereas the sliding speed was not different (0.310 +/- 0.034 for myectomy myosin vs. 0.305 +/- 0.019 microm/s for donor myosin in six paired experiments). Failing heart myosin showed 18% reduced motility. One myectomy myosin sample produced a consistently higher sliding speed than donor heart myosin and was identified with a disease-causing heavy chain mutation (V606M). In myectomy myosin, the level of atrial light chain-1 relative to ventricular light chain-1 was 20 +/- 5% compared with 11 +/- 5% in donor heart myosin and the level of myosin light chain-2 phosphorylation was decreased by 30-45%. Isolated cardiomyocytes showed reduced contraction amplitude (1.61 +/- 0.25 vs. 3.58 +/- 0.40%) and reduced relaxation rates compared with donor myocytes (TT(50%) = 0.32 +/- 0.09 vs. 0.17 +/- 0.02 s). Contractility in myectomy samples resembles the hypocontractile phenotype found in end-stage failing heart muscle irrespective of the primary stimulus, and this phenotype is not a direct effect of the hypertrophy-inducing mutation. The presence of a myosin heavy chain mutation causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can be predicted from a simple functional assay.",4
"Haematological spectrum and genotype-phenotype correlations in nine unrelated families with RUNX1 mutations from the French network on inherited platelet disorders. || Adolescent Adult Blood Coagulation Disorders, Inherited Blood Platelet Disorders Child Child, Preschool Comparative Genomic Hybridization Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit Female Genetic Association Studies Humans Infant Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute Male Middle Aged Mutation Pedigree Thrombocytopenia Young Adult || Less than 50 patients with FPD/AML (OMIM 601309) have been reported as of today and there may an underestimation. The purpose of this study was to describe the natural history, the haematological features and the genotype-phenotype correlations of this entity in order to, first, screen it better and earlier, before leukaemia occurrence and secondly to optimize appropriate monitoring and treatment, in particular when familial stem cell transplantation is considered. We have investigated 41 carriers of RUNX1 alteration belonging to nine unrelated French families with FPD/AML and two syndromic patients, registered in the French network on rare platelet disorders from 2005 to 2015. Five missense, one non-sense, three frameshift mutations and two large deletions involving several genes including RUNX1 were evidenced. The history of familial leukaemia was suggestive of FPD/AML in seven pedigrees, whereas an autosomal dominant pattern of lifelong thrombocytopenia was the clinical presentation of two. Additional syndromic features characterized two large sporadic deletions. Bleeding tendency was mild and thrombocytopenia moderate (>50 x10(9)/L), with normal platelet volume. A functional platelet defect consistent with a δ-granule release defect was found in ten patients regardless of the type of RUNX1 alteration. The incidence of haematological malignancies was higher when the mutated RUNX1 allele was likely to cause a dominant negative effect (19/34) in comparison with loss of function alleles (3/9). A normal platelet count does not rule out the diagnosis of FPD/AML, since the platelet count was found normal for three mutated subjects, a feature that has a direct impact in the search for a related donor in case of allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Platelet dysfunction suggestive of defective δ-granule release could be of values for the diagnosis of FPD/AML particularly when the clinical presentation is an autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia with normal platelet size in the absence of familial malignancies. The genotype-phenotype correlations might be helpful in genetic counselling and appropriate optimal therapeutic management.",2 4
"Ten-year outcome of enzyme replacement therapy with agalsidase beta in patients with Fabry disease. || Adolescent Adult Enzyme Replacement Therapy Fabry Disease Female Follow-Up Studies Humans Isoenzymes Kidney Diseases Male Middle Aged Recombinant Proteins Treatment Outcome Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease results from deficient α-galactosidase A activity and globotriaosylceramide accumulation causing renal insufficiency, strokes, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and early demise. We assessed the 10-year outcome of recombinant α-galactosidase A therapy. The outcomes (severe clinical events, renal function, cardiac structure) of 52/58 patients with classic Fabry disease from the phase 3 clinical trial and extension study, and the Fabry Registry were evaluated. Disease progression rates for patients with low renal involvement (LRI, n=32) or high renal involvement (HRI, n=20) at baseline were assessed. 81% of patients (42/52) did not experience any severe clinical event during the treatment interval and 94% (49/52) were alive at the end of the study period. Ten patients reported a total of 16 events. Patients classified as LRI started therapy 13 years younger than HRI (mean 25 years vs 38 years). Mean slopes for estimated glomerular filtration rate for LRI and HRI were -1.89 mL/min/1.73 m(2)/year and -6.82 mL/min/1.73 m(2)/year, respectively. Overall, the mean left ventricular posterior wall thickness and interventricular septum thickness remained unchanged and normal. Patients who initiated treatment at age ≥ 40 years exhibited significant increase in left ventricular posterior wall thickness and interventricular septum thickness. Mean plasma globotriaosylceramide normalised within 6 months. This 10-year study documents the effectiveness of agalsidase beta (1 mg/kg/2 weeks) in patients with Fabry disease. Most patients remained alive and event-free. Patients who initiated treatment at a younger age and with less kidney involvement benefited the most from therapy. Patients who initiated treatment at older ages and/or had advanced renal disease experienced disease progression.",3 4
"Analyses of Genetic and Clinical Parameters for Screening Patients With Inherited Thrombocytopenia with Small or Normal-Sized Platelets. || Adolescent Blood Platelets Cell Size Child Child, Preschool Chromosome Deletion Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit Family Female Genetic Diseases, Inborn Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Nuclear Proteins Signal Transduction Thrombocytopenia Thrombopoiesis Thrombopoietin Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome Protein || Childhood thrombocytopenias include immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and inherited thrombocytopenia; the former is caused by autoantibodies to platelets, whereas the latter can be distinguished by platelet size and underlying genetic mutations. Due to limited methods for the definite diagnosis of ITP, genetic and clinical parameters are required for diagnosing inherited thrombocytopenias with small or normal-sized platelets. In total, 32 Japanese patients with thrombocytopenia with small or normal-sized platelets from 29 families were enrolled. All the patients were under 20 years of age, with family histories of early-onset thrombocytopenia and/or poor response to conventional therapies for ITP. Genotypes and clinical parameters were retrospectively evaluated according to the disease type. Twelve cases of inherited thrombocytopenia were observed. We identified chromosomal deletions within the WASP gene in two patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome; a missense mutation in a patient with X-linked thrombocytopenia; and mutations in the RUNX1 gene of five patients with familial platelet disorder with propensity to acute myelogenous leukemia, and in the ANKRD26 gene of four patients with autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia-2. All 12 carried germline mutations, three of which were de novo. Furthermore, we observed significantly elevated serum thrombopoietin (TPO) levels and dysplasia of megakaryocytes in patients carrying the RUNX1 and ANKRD26 mutations. Genetic analyses and detection of TPO levels and dysmegakaryopoiesis were clinically useful for screening patients with inherited thrombocytopenias, irrespective of the family history. We hypothesize that the WASP, RUNX1, and ANKRD26 genes are important for normal TPO signaling and the network underlying thrombopoiesis.",2 4
Case of epirubicin-induced cardiomyopathy in familial cardiomyopathy. ||  || ,4
"Pregnancy in homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia--Importance of LDL-apheresis. || Biomarkers Blood Component Removal Cholesterol, LDL DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Homozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Immunosorbent Techniques Live Birth Mutation Phenotype Pregnancy Pregnancy Complications Receptors, LDL Severity of Illness Index Time Factors Treatment Outcome || Rare cases of pregnancy in women with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HFH) have been reported. HFH might pose significant risks for the mother and her fetus. Statins, the most potent agents for low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol reduction, are contraindicated; thus lipoprotein apheresis remains the only effective treatment. We report on a 34-year-old pregnant woman with HFH who was treated throughout the entire pregnancy by lipoprotein apheresis (immunoadsorption method). Increasing levels of LDL-cholesterol were stabilized at 9-10 mmol/L by lipoprotein apheresis (performed every 10 days). No complications were observed during the treatment procedures. Monitoring of the fetus revealed no impairment of the umbilical cord and blood flow in the uterine arteries, as well as no intrauterine growth retardation. The delivery was spontaneous and the child was breastfed for two months. Intensive treatment by lipoprotein apheresis is an effective and safe therapeutic strategy during pregnancy, even in severe cases of HFH, as it can stabilize progressively increasing lipoprotein levels and prevent severe complications.",3 4
"Phenotype and biochemical heterogeneity in late onset Fabry disease defined by N215S mutation. || Adolescent Adult Age of Onset Aged Aged, 80 and over Carboxymethylcellulose Sodium Fabry Disease Female Genetic Association Studies Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Retrospective Studies Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) results from X-linked inheritance of a mutation in the GLA gene, encoding for alpha galactosidase A, and is characterized by heterogeneous clinical manifestations. Two phenotypes have been described ""Classic"" and ""late onset"" which cannot be predicted exclusively by genotype. The latter has been considered an attenuated form of the disease often affecting a single organ system commonly the heart. Recent studies have demonstrated that cardiac outcomes are similar in patients with classic and late onset mutations. In this study we investigate the relationship between clinical heterogeneity and plasma lyso-Gb3 in a large single centre cohort of N215S patients and compare this to patients with other mutations. In this single-centre, retrospective, cross-sectional study we analysed a cohort of 251 FD patients: 84 N215S mutation (37 males) and 167 non-N215S mutations (58 males). The Mainz severity score index (MSSI) was used as an index of overall disease severity. Cardiac function and morphology were assessed by electrocardiogram and echocardiogram. Left ventricular mass was calculated using the Devereux formula and the left ventricular mass index (LVMI) calculated to adjust for height (g/m2.7). The presence of white matter lesions was assessed by cerebral MRI or computed tomography (CT). GFR was measured by radio-isotope (chromium-EDTA) method and adjusted for patient height (ml/min/m2.7), and urinary protein quantification was undertaken by 24 hour urine collection. Plasma globotriaosylsphingosine (lyso-Gb3) was analysed prior to ERT in 84 patients. N215S patients showed later symptom onset (males: p< 0.0001, females: p<0.03), later development of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) (median survival without LVH: 41 (non-N215S) vs. 64 (N215S) years, p< 0.0001), later development of proteinuria (median survival without proteinuria 43 (non-N215S) vs 71 years (N215S), p< 0.0001), later occurrence of cerebrovascular events (stroke/ Transient Ischaemic Attacks (TIA); median survival without stroke: 74 years (non-N215S) vs. not reached (N215S), p< 0.02), later decline in renal function to GFR <60 ml/min/1.73m2 (median survival: 56 (non-N215S) vs. 72 (N215S) years, p< 0.01), and greater overall survival (median survival 81 (N215S) vs. 66 (non-N215S) years, p< 0.0006). Lyso-Gb3 was found to be less elevated in N215S compared to non-N215S male and female patients. However, the N215S population eventually reached an overall severity measured by MSSI comparable to the non-N215S without equivalent elevation of lyso-Gb3 (means: 6.7 vs. 74.3 nmol/L, p < 0.001). In addition, N215S patients showed strong correlations between lyso-Gb3 levels and LVMI, GFR, and MSSI. These associations became stronger when we investigated individuals' life time exposure to lyso-Gb3 (calculated as [lyso-Gb3]*age): MSSI (r2 = 0.88, p< 0.0001), LVMI (r2 = 0.59, p< 0.005), and GFR (r2 = 0.75, p = 0.0001). These results demonstrate that the N215S mutation results in a late onset phenotype involving the heart and other organs. Correlations between clinical manifestations and plasma lyso-Gb3 variations in this group suggest a Fabry-relevant disease mechanism for the heterogeneity observed in this group.",3 4
"PTPN11, SOS1, KRAS, and RAF1 gene analysis, and genotype-phenotype correlation in Korean patients with Noonan syndrome. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genotype Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Korea Male Mutation Noonan Syndrome Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Proto-Oncogene Proteins Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-raf Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras) SOS1 Protein ras Proteins || After 2006, germline mutations in the KRAS, SOS1, and RAF1 genes were reported to cause Noonan syndrome (NS), in addition to the PTPN11 gene, and now we can find the etiology of disease in approximately 60-70% of NS cases. The aim of this study was to assess the correlation between phenotype and genotype by molecular analysis of the PTPN11, SOS1, KRAS, and RAF1 genes in 59 Korean patients with NS. We found disease-causing mutations in 30 (50.8%) patients, which were located in the PTPN11 (27.1%), SOS1 (16.9%), KRAS (1.7%), and RAF1 (5.1%) genes. Three novel mutations (T59A in PTPN11, K170E in SOS1, S259T in RAF1) were identified. The patients with PTPN11 mutations showed higher prevalences of patent ductus arteriosus and thrombocytopenia. The patients with SOS1 mutations had a lower prevalence of delayed psychomotor development. All patients with RAF1 mutations had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Typical facial features and auxological parameters were, on statistical analysis, not significantly different between the groups. The molecular defects of NS are genetically heterogeneous and involve several genes other than PTPN11 related to the RAS-MAPK pathway.",4
"Molecular basis of hereditary cardiomyopathy: abnormalities in calcium sensitivity, stretch response, stress response and beyond. || Calcium Cardiomyopathies Chromosome Mapping Gene Frequency Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Japan Korea Mutation Phenotype Sarcomeres || Cardiomyopathy is caused by functional abnormality of cardiac muscle. The functional abnormality involved in its etiology includes both extrinsic and intrinsic factors, and cardiomyopathy caused by the intrinsic factors is called as idiopathic or primary cardiomyopathy. There are several clinical types of primary cardiomyopathy including hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Linkage studies and candidate gene approaches have explored the disease genes for hereditary primary cardiomyopathy. The most notable finding was that mutations in the same disease gene can be found in different clinical types of cardiomyopathy. Functional analyses of disease-related mutations have revealed that characteristic functional alterations are associated with the clinical types, such that increased and decreased Ca(2+) sensitivity due to sarcomere mutations are associated with HCM and DCM, respectively. In addition, our recent studies have suggested that mutations in the Z-disc components found in HCM and DCM may result in increased and decreased stiffness of sarcomere; that is, stiff sarcomere and loose sarcomere, respectively, and hence altered stretch response. More recently, mutations in the components of I region were found in hereditary cardiomyopathy and the functional analyses of the mutations suggested that the altered stress response was associated with cardiomyopathy, further complicating the etiology and pathogenesis. However, elucidation of genetic etiology and functional alterations caused by the mutations shed lights on the new therapeutic approaches to hereditary cardiomyopathy, such that treatment of DCM with a Ca(2+) sensitizer prevented the disease in a mouse model.",4
"Comprehensive genetic testing in the clinical evaluation of 1119 patients with hearing loss. || Adolescent Child Child, Preschool Female Genetic Heterogeneity Genetic Testing Hearing Loss Humans Infant Male || Hearing loss is the most common sensory deficit in humans, affecting 1 in 500 newborns. Due to its genetic heterogeneity, comprehensive diagnostic testing has not previously been completed in a large multiethnic cohort. To determine the aggregate contribution inheritance makes to non-syndromic hearing loss, we performed comprehensive clinical genetic testing with targeted genomic enrichment and massively parallel sequencing on 1119 sequentially accrued patients. No patient was excluded based on phenotype, inheritance or previous testing. Testing resulted in identification of the underlying genetic cause for hearing loss in 440 patients (39%). Pathogenic variants were found in 49 genes and included missense variants (49%), large copy number changes (18%), small insertions and deletions (18%), nonsense variants (8%), splice-site alterations (6%), and promoter variants (<1%). The diagnostic rate varied considerably based on phenotype and was highest for patients with a positive family history of hearing loss or when the loss was congenital and symmetric. The spectrum of implicated genes showed wide ethnic variability. These findings support the more efficient utilization of medical resources through the development of evidence-based algorithms for the diagnosis of hearing loss.",1 4
"Glycogen storage disease type II in Spanish patients: high frequency of c.1076-1G>C mutation. || Adult Age of Onset Aged Child Child, Preschool Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Homozygote Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Lysosomes Middle Aged Mutation Spain alpha-Glucosidases || Glycogen storage disease type II is an autosomal recessive disorder of glycogen metabolism due to deficiency of lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase. We present the molecular and enzymatic analyses of 22 Spanish GSD II patients. Molecular analyses revealed nine novel mutations. The most common defects were mutations c.-32-13T>G (25%) and c.1076-1G>C (14%) and we report the first homozygous patient for c.1076-1G>C mutation presenting with an infantile form. Alleles bearing mutation c.-32-13T>G are associated with the same haplotype.",3 1 4
"Genetic variability of GCKR alters lipid profiles in children with monogenic and autoimmune diabetes. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Child Child, Preschool Cholesterol, LDL Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1 Female Glucose-6-Phosphatase Glycated Hemoglobin A Homozygote Humans Infant Male Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Registries Triglycerides || Mutations in the glucokinase (GCK) gene are associated with altered blood glucose and lipid concentrations. Our aim was to assess the effects on HbA1c and serum lipid levels of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 2 genes encoding proteins that interact with glucokinase: glucose-6-phospatase catalytic subunit 2 (G6PC2) and glucokinase regulatory protein (GCKR). The study group included 129 children with GCK-MODY from the Polish Registry of Monogenic Diabetes and 395 with type 1 diabetes (T1DM), in whom we genotyped 2 SNPs in G6PC2 (rs560887) and GCKR (rs1260326). Lipid concentrations were assessed in fasting serum samples. Total and HDL cholesterol concentrations were significantly lower in the GCK-MODY group than in patients with T1DM (167.5±32.5 mg/dl vs. 174.4±31.1 mg/dl, p=0.0435 and 48.42±14.3 mg/dl vs. 58.7±12.7 mg/dl, p<0.0001, respectively). No differences in genotype distributions were found except for underrepresentation of GCKR TT homozygotes among GCK-MODY patients (10.9% in GCK-MODY vs. 17.7% in T1DM, p=0.0651). GCKR genotypes showed significant associations with lipid profiles and HbA1c levels, whereas no such associations were noted for G6PC2. After adjustment for confounders, TT homozygotes were shown to have higher total cholesterol and marginally higher LDL cholesterol and triglyceride levels (p=0.0245, p=0.0657 and p=0.0550, respectively). The difference between TT homozygotes and other genotypes was similar in magnitude within the GCK-MODY and T1DM groups. No significant interactions between the type of diabetes and the GCKR or G6PC2 genotype were detected. Individuals who are homozygous TT at rs1260326 of the GCKR gene have higher triglyceride, total and LDL cholesterol levels regardless of the presence of GCK mutations.",4
"Assessing the phenotypic effects in the general population of rare variants in genes for a dominant Mendelian form of diabetes. || Adult Base Sequence Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Transcription Factors Chromosome Mapping Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Variation Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4 Homeodomain Proteins Humans Male Middle Aged Phenotype Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Risk Sequence Analysis, DNA Trans-Activators Young Adult || Genome sequencing can identify individuals in the general population who harbor rare coding variants in genes for Mendelian disorders and who may consequently have increased disease risk. Previous studies of rare variants in phenotypically extreme individuals display ascertainment bias and may demonstrate inflated effect-size estimates. We sequenced seven genes for maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) in well-phenotyped population samples (n = 4,003). We filtered rare variants according to two prediction criteria for disease-causing mutations: reported previously in MODY or satisfying stringent de novo thresholds (rare, conserved and protein damaging). Approximately 1.5% and 0.5% of randomly selected individuals from the Framingham and Jackson Heart Studies, respectively, carry variants from these two classes. However, the vast majority of carriers remain euglycemic through middle age. Accurate estimates of variant effect sizes from population-based sequencing are needed to avoid falsely predicting a substantial fraction of individuals as being at risk for MODY or other Mendelian diseases.",4
"Development of a diagnostic genetic test for simplex and autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa. || Base Sequence DNA Mutational Analysis Electroretinography Eye Proteins Female Genes, Recessive Genetic Testing Genotype Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis Pedigree Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Retinitis Pigmentosa Visual Acuity || Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) causes hereditary blindness in adults (prevalence, approximately 1 in 4000). Each of the more than 30 causative genes identified to date are responsible for only a small percentage of cases. Genetic diagnosis via traditional methods is problematic, and a single test with a higher probability of detecting the causative mutation would be very beneficial for the clinician. The goal of this study therefore was to develop a high-throughput screen capable of detecting both known mutations and novel mutations within all genes implicated in autosomal recessive or simplex RP. Evaluation of diagnostic technology. Participants were 56 simplex and autosomal recessive RP patients, with 360 population controls unscreened for ophthalmic disease. A custom genechip capable of resequencing all exons containing known mutations in 19 disease-associated genes was developed (RP genechip). A second, commercially available arrayed primer extension (APEX) system was used to screen 501 individual previously reported variants. The ability of these high-throughput approaches to identify pathogenic variants was assessed in a cohort of simplex and autosomal recessive RP patients. Number of mutations and potentially pathogenic variants identified. The RP genechip identified 44 sequence variants: 5 previously reported mutations; 22 known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs); 11 novel, potentially pathogenic variants; and 6 novel SNPs. There was strong concordance with the APEX array, but only the RP genechip detected novel variants. For example, identification of a novel mutation in CRB1 revealed a patient, who also had a single previously known CRB1 mutation, to be a compound heterozygote. In some individuals, potentially pathogenic variants were discovered in more than one gene, consistent with the existence of disease modifier effects resulting from mutations at a second locus. The RP genechip provides the significant advantage of detecting novel variants and could be expected to detect at least one pathogenic variant in more than 50% of patients. The APEX array provides a reliable method to detect known pathogenic variants in autosomal recessive RP and simplex RP patients and is commercially available. High-throughput genotyping for RP is evolving into a clinically useful genetic diagnostic tool. The author(s) have no proprietary or commercial interest in any materials discussed in this article.",4
"Pediatric cardiomyopathy: importance of genetic and metabolic evaluation. || Adolescent Cardiomyopathies Carrier Proteins Child Child, Preschool DNA, Mitochondrial Echocardiography Female Genetic Testing Heart Ventricles Humans Infant Male Mutation Ohio Pedigree Prevalence Retrospective Studies Young Adult || Cardiomyopathy is a heterogeneous disease with a strong genetic component. A research-based pediatric cardiomyopathy registry identified familial, syndromic, or metabolic causes in 30% of children. However, these results predated clinical genetic testing. We determined the prevalence of familial, syndromic, or metabolic causes in 83 consecutive unrelated patients referred for genetic evaluation of cardiomyopathy from 2006 to 2009. Seventy-six percent of probands (n = 63) were categorized as familial, syndromic, or metabolic. Forty-three percent (n = 18) of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) patients had mutations in sarcomeric genes, with MYH7 and MYBPC3 mutations predominating. Syndromic (17%; n = 7) and metabolic (26%; n = 11) causes were frequently identified in HCM patients. The metabolic subgroup was differentiated by decreased endocardial shortening fraction on echocardiography. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) patients had similar rates of syndromic (20%; n = 5) and metabolic (16%; n = 4) causes, but fewer familial cases (24%; n = 6) compared with HCM patients. The cause of cardiomyopathy is identifiable in a majority of affected children. An underlying metabolic or syndromic cause is identified in >35% of children with HCM or DCM. Identification of etiology is important for management, family-based risk assessment, and screening.",1 4
"Uptake of cardiac screening and genetic testing among hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy families. ||  || Cardiomyopathy is a genetically and clinically heterogeneous, life threatening disease which affects people of all ages. Recent guidelines provide recommendations for cardiac screening and genetic testing in at-risk relatives, but the uptake and impact of these measures in the United States is unknown. This is a single institution retrospective study that characterizes the uptake of cardiac screening and genetic testing for relatives of a cohort of 57 probands with hypertrophic (HCM) and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) who underwent both clinical evaluation and genetic testing. Cardiac screening was indicated for 302 relatives. One hundred and seventy-three (57 %) completed cardiac screening. Forty of the 57 probands were mutation positive and genetic testing was indicated for 213 relatives. Eighty-four (39 %) completed genetic testing. The uptake of cardiac surveillance was greater than the uptake of genetic testing (p < 0.0001) among relatives of mutation positive probands. Within the group of at-risk, asymptomatic relatives of probands, cardiac screening and genetic testing were positive in 25 % and 40 % of cases, respectively. These data demonstrate the important role and utility of cascade cardiac screening and genetic testing in the care of patients and families with HCM or DCM. The approach to cardiac screening and genetic testing should be family-specific and requires expertise in the genetics of cardiomyopathy.",2 4
"Genetic defects causing familial hypercholesterolaemia: identification of deletions and duplications in the LDL-receptor gene and summary of all mutations found in patients attending the Hammersmith Hospital Lipid Clinic. || Apolipoproteins B Exons Gene Deletion Gene Duplication Gene Rearrangement Genetic Testing Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Nucleic Acid Amplification Techniques Point Mutation Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Receptors, LDL Serine Endopeptidases || Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) results from defective catabolism of low density lipoproteins (LDL), leading to premature atherosclerosis and early coronary heart disease. It is commonly caused by mutations in LDLR, encoding the LDL receptor that mediates hepatic uptake of LDL, or in APOB, encoding its major ligand. More rarely, dominant mutations in PCSK9 or recessive mutations in LDLRAP1 (ARH) cause FH, gene defects that also affect the LDL-receptor pathway. We have used multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) to identify deletions and rearrangements in LDLR, some not detectable by Southern blotting, thus completing our screening for mutations causing FH in a group of FH patients referred to a Lipid Clinic in London. To summarise, mutations in LDLR were found in 153 unrelated heterozygous FH patients and 24 homozygotes/compound heterozygotes, and in over 200 relatives of 80 index patients. LDLR mutations included 85 different point mutations (7 not previously described) and 13 different large rearrangements. The APOB R3500Q mutation was present in 14 heterozygous patients and a mutation in PCSK9 in another 4; LDLRAP1 mutations were found in 4 ""homozygous"" FH patients. Our data confirm that DNA-based diagnosis provides information that is important for management of FH in a considerable number of families.",4
"A new common mutation in the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene in Finnish patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins Female Finland Heterozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Myosin Heavy Chains Prevalence Tropomyosin Ventricular Myosins || In the nationwide FinHCM Study including 306 Finnish patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), we have previously identified two founder mutations in the alpha-tropomyosin (TPM1-D175N) and myosin-binding protein C (MYBPC3-Q1061X) genes, accounting for 18% of all cases. Objective. To screen additional mutations, previously identified in eastern Finnish cohorts with HCM, in the FinHCM Study population. Ten mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene (MYH7), TPM1, and MYBPC3 were screened. MYH7-R1053Q was found in 17 of 306 patients (5.6%). No carriers of MYH7-R719W or N696S were found. A novel TPM1-D175G mutation was found in a single patient. MYBPC3 mutations were found in 14 patients: IVS5-2A-C in two, IVS14-13G-A in two, K811del in six, and A851insT in four patients. Altogether, a HCM-causing mutation was identified in 32 patients, accounting for 10.5% of all cases. In addition, two MYBPC3 variants R326Q and V896M with uncertain pathogenicity were found in eight and in 10 patients, respectively. Combining the present findings with our previous results, a causative mutation was identified in 28% of the FinHCM cohort. MYH7-R1053Q was the third most common mutation, and should be screened in all new cases of HCM in Finland.",4
"X-chromosome inactivation in female patients with Fabry disease. || Adult Aged Enzyme Activation Fabry Disease Female Genetic Diseases, X-Linked Heterozygote Humans Kidney Function Tests Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Promoter Regions, Genetic RNA, Long Noncoding Severity of Illness Index Ventricular Remodeling X Chromosome Inactivation Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked genetic disorder caused by the deficient activity of lysosomal α-galactosidase (α-Gal). While males are usually severely affected, clinical presentation in female patients may be more variable ranging from asymptomatic to, occasionally, as severely affected as male patients. The aim of this study was to evaluate the existence of skewed X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) in females with FD, its concordance between tissues, and its contribution to the phenotype. Fifty-six females with FD were enrolled. Clinical and biological work-up included two global scores [Mainz Severity Score Index (MSSI) and DS3], cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, measured glomerular filtration rate, and measurement of α-Gal activity. XCI was analyzed in four tissues using DNA methylation studies. Skewed XCI was found in 29% of the study population. A correlation was found in XCI patterns between blood and the other analyzed tissues although some punctual variability was detected. Significant differences in residual α-Gal levels, severity scores, progression of cardiomyopathy and deterioration of kidney function, depending on the direction and degree of skewing of XCI were evidenced. XCI significantly impacts the phenotype and natural history of FD in females.",3 4
"Molecular genetic analysis of 1053 Danish individuals with clinical signs of familial hypercholesterolemia. || Apolipoprotein B-100 Apolipoproteins B Denmark Female Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Molecular Biology Mutation Receptors, LDL || The lipid disorder familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) predisposes to cardiovascular disease. With a prevalence of approximately one in 500 in the general Caucasian population, FH is one of the most frequent single-gene disorders. As the mutational spectra vary between populations, it is crucial to identify the mutations in a given population in order to implement a molecular genetic screening strategy. A total of 1053 referred individuals with clinical signs of FH were investigated, and mutations were identified in 425 individuals. Fifty-four different mutations were identified, of which 13 are novel. The five most frequent mutations accounted for 56.3% of all disease-causing mutations. The majority of the remaining mutations were of a private nature only encountered in single families. In this study, a reliable molecular genetic screening protocol was established, and the relevance of performing presymptomatic genetic analysis as part of a preventive strategy was documented. We have acquired knowledge of the mutational spectra in the Danish population and thus will be able to trace mutations in their relatives through our index cases.",4
"Identification of a new missense mutation at Arg403, a CpG mutation hotspot, in exon 13 of the beta-myosin heavy chain gene in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Base Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Exons Genes Humans Molecular Sequence Data Myosins Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction || ",2 4
"Application of whole-exome sequencing to direct the specific functional testing and diagnosis of rare inherited bleeding disorders in patients from the Öresund Region, Scandinavia. || Blood Coagulation Disorders, Inherited Denmark Exome Female Genome-Wide Association Study Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Sweden || Rare inherited bleeding disorders (IBD) are a common cause of bleeding tendency. To ensure a correct diagnosis, specialized laboratory analyses are necessary. This study reports the results of an upfront diagnostic strategy using targeted whole exome sequencing. In total, 156 patients with a significant bleeding assessment tool score participated in the study, of which a third had thrombocytopenia. Eighty-seven genes specifically associated with genetic predisposition to bleeding were analysed by whole exome sequencing. Variants were classified according to the five-tier scheme. We identified 353 germline variants. Eight patients (5%) harboured a known pathogenic variant. Of the 345 previously unknown variants, computational analyses predicted 99 to be significant. Further filtration according to the Mendelian inheritance pattern, resulted in 59 variants being predicted to be clinically significant. Moreover, 34% (20/59) were assigned as novel class 4 or 5 variants upon targeted functional testing. A class 4 or 5 variant was identified in 30% of patients with thrombocytopenia (14/47) versus 11% of patients with a normal platelet count (12/109) (P < 0·01). An IBD diagnosis has a major clinical impact. The genetic investigations detailed here extricated our patients from a diagnostic conundrum, thus demonstrating that continuous optimization of the diagnostic work-up of IBD is of great benefit.",2 4
"Malignant hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by the Arg723Gly mutation in beta-myosin heavy chain gene. || Adult Age Factors Aged Arginine Cardiomyopathies Electrocardiography Female Glycine Humans Life Expectancy Male Middle Aged Mutation Mutation, Missense Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Genetic Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Restriction Mapping Sequence Analysis, DNA || Mutations causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy have been described in nine genes encoding sarcomeric proteins. We report a new mutation in three families, with a C-->G transversion in nucleotide 12 307 of the beta-myosin heavy chain gene, located at the essential light chain interacting region, resulting in the replacement of arginine by glycine at amino acid residue 723. PCR amplification of the selected regions followed by single strand conformation polymorphism analysis, DNA sequencing of the polymorphic patterns and restriction analysis were used to detect the mutation. A total of 23 individuals were diagnosed as carriers, and seven were obligate carriers or had been clinically diagnosed. The Arg723Gly mutation was associated with a malignant phenotype. Ten out of 30 affected members died suddenly or needed an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator at a mean age of 42, and seven members developed progressive heart failure, leading to death or heart transplant in five, at a mean age of 50 years. Echocardiography showed non-obstructive left ventricular hypertrophy in affected members older than 20 (sensitivity 68%). Mean survival of affected members was 51 years. In conclusion, a new mutation Arg723Gly in beta-myosin heavy chain gene is reported which shortens life expectancy because of sudden death and end-stage heart failure.",4
"Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. || Alleles Carbohydrate Dehydrogenases Family Health Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Male Mutation Pedigree Stomach Neoplasms || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is a cancer predisposition syndrome caused by germline mutation of the gene for the cell-to-cell adhesion protein E-cadherin. The syndrome is dominated by predisposition to the histologically diffuse, poorly differentiated form of gastric cancer. It is not associated with intestinal-type gastric cancer, but families may have an elevated risk of lobular breast cancer. Here, we review the identified families, mutations, and proposed mechanisms by which E-cadherin loss promotes tumorigenesis.",4
"Maturity onset diabetes of the young: clinical characteristics and outcome after kidney and pancreas transplantation in MODY3 and RCAD patients: a single center experience. || Adult Central Nervous System Diseases Cohort Studies Dental Enamel Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Follow-Up Studies Graft Survival Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta Humans Islets of Langerhans Transplantation Kidney Diseases, Cystic Kidney Transplantation Male Middle Aged Mutation Survival Analysis || The diabetes and renal phenotype of patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) on a transplantation waiting list is not known; neither is their outcome after pancreas (PT) and/or kidney transplantation (KT). Between 2002 and 2009, we screened 50 of 150 patients referred for kidney and pancreas transplantation to the Kremlin-Bicêtre center for HNF1B and HNF1A mutations if one or more of the following criteria was present (i) an atypical history of diabetes (ii) diabetes with at least one affected parent or two affected relatives, (iii) an absence of auto-antibodies at diagnosis (iv) a persistent secretion of fasting C peptide (v) a personal or a family history of renal cysts or dysplasia. Their phenotype and their outcome were analyzed. Four HNF1A (MODY3) and eight HNF1B mutations [renal cysts and diabetes (RCAD)] were identified. All MODY3 patients had diabetic nephropathy, but only 50% of RCAD patients. Four patients underwent a kidney and pancreas transplantation and two a kidney transplant alone. After 4.1 ± 1.1 years of follow-up, 83% of patients still have a functioning kidney and 75% a functioning pancreas. PT can be proposed with good results for MODY3 and RCAD patients.",4
"Rapid Immunochromatographic Detection of Serum Anti-α-Galactosidase A Antibodies in Fabry Patients after Enzyme Replacement Therapy. || Adolescent Adult Antibodies Child Chromatography, Affinity Enzyme Replacement Therapy Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay Fabry Disease Female Genotype Humans Isoenzymes Male Middle Aged Phenotype Recombinant Proteins Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || We developed an immunochromatography-based assay for detecting antibodies against recombinant α-galactosidase A proteins in serum. The evaluation of 29 serum samples from Fabry patients, who had received enzyme replacement therapy with agalsidase alpha and/or agalsidase beta, was performed by means of this assay method, and the results clearly revealed that the patients exhibited the same level of antibodies against both agalsidase alpha and agalsidase beta, regardless of the species of recombinant α-galactosidase A used for enzyme replacement therapy. A conventional enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay supported the results. Considering these, enzyme replacement therapy with agalsidase alpha or agalsidase beta would generate antibodies against the common epitopes in both agalsidase alpha and agalsidase beta. Most of the patients who showed immunopositive reaction exhibited classic Fabry phenotype and harbored gene mutations affecting biosynthesis of α-galactosidase A. As immunochromatography is a handy and simple assay system which can be available at bedside, this assay method would be extremely useful for quick evaluation or first screening of serum antibodies against agalsidase alpha or agalsidase beta in Fabry disease with enzyme replacement therapy.",3 4
"Prevalence of Variant Reclassification Following Hereditary Cancer Genetic Testing. ||  || Variant reclassification is an important component of hereditary cancer genetic testing; however, there are few published data quantifying the prevalence of reclassification. Retrospective cohort study of individuals who had genetic testing from 2006 through 2016 at a single commercial laboratory. A retrospective cohort of individuals who had genetic testing between 2006 and 2016 at a single commercial laboratory was assessed. Variants were classified as benign, likely benign, variant of uncertain significance, likely pathogenic, or pathogenic. Retrospective chart reviews were conducted for patients from the University of Texas Southwestern (UTSW) Medical Center. Hereditary cancer genetic testing. Frequency of and time to amended reports; frequency and types of variant reclassification. From 2006 through 2018, 1.45 million individuals (median [interquartile range] age at testing, 49 years [40.69-58.31 years], 95.6% women) had genetic testing, and 56.6% (n = 821 724) had a personal history of cancer. A total of 1.67 million initial tests were reported and 59 955 amended reports were issued due to variant reclassification. Overall, 6.4% (2868 of 44 777) of unique variants were reclassified. Reclassification to a different clinical category was rare among unique variants initially classified as pathogenic or likely pathogenic (0.7%, 61 of 9112) or benign or likely benign (0.2%, 15 of 8995). However, 7.7% (2048 of 26 670) of unique variants of uncertain significance were reclassified: 91.2% (1867 of 2048) were downgraded to benign or likely benign (median time to amended report, 1.17 years), 8.7% (178 of 2048) were upgraded to pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants (median time to amended report, 1.86 years). Because most variants were observed in more than 1 individual, 24.9% (46 890 of 184 327) of all reported variants of uncertain significance were reclassified. Following hereditary cancer genetic testing at a single commercial laboratory, 24.9% of variants of uncertain significance were reclassified, which included both downgrades and upgrades. Further research is needed to assess generalizability of the findings for other laboratories, as well as the clinical consequences of the reclassification as a component of a genetic testing program.",4
"The type of LDLR gene mutation predicts cardiovascular risk in children with familial hypercholesterolemia. || Adolescent Adult Aorta Apolipoproteins B Carotid Arteries Case-Control Studies Child Child, Preschool Cholesterol Cholesterol, LDL Coronary Artery Disease Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Infant Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-1 Male Middle Aged Mutation Risk Tunica Intima Tunica Media Young Adult || To ascertain whether the molecular characterization of a defect in the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene (LDLR) in children with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (heFH) identifies subjects at greater risk of developing premature coronary artery disease (pCAD) later in life. We investigated 264 children with heFH from 201 families, along with 148 affected parents and 100 unaffected siblings. The lipid profile was assessed before any treatment was provided, and genotype analysis was performed to characterize LDLR defects. In a subgroup of children with heFH and controls, we measured aorta and carotid intima-media thickness (aIMT and cIMT). The prevalence of pCAD in parents and/or grandparents with heFH was recorded. The children with heFH with a family history of pCAD had higher LDL cholesterol and apolipoprotein B levels and greater aIMT and cIMT than those with negative family history. Compared with carriers of LDLR-defective mutations, carriers of LDLR-negative mutations had a more severe phenotype, in terms of plasma lipid levels and IMT, and a higher prevalence of pCAD in first-degree relatives (36% vs 6.7%; P < .001). The study of heFH in children, in which other risk factors for CAD play a minor role, allows early identification of those at increased risk for developing pCAD, who merit more stringent clinical control and early pharmacologic treatment.",4
"GJB2 deafness gene shows a specific spectrum of mutations in Japan, including a frequent founder mutation. ||  || Mutations in the GJB2 gene (connexin 26) are the major cause of autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing impairment in many populations. In contrast to the volume of information regarding the involvement of GJB2 mutations in hearing impairment in populations of European ancestry, less is known regarding other ethnic groups. In this study, we analyzed the GJB2 gene for mutations in 1227 hearing-impaired Japanese individuals. This revealed a unique spectrum of GJB2 mutations, different from that found in the Caucasian population. The most frequent mutation in Japanese, 235delC, has never been reported in Caucasians. To investigate a possible founder effect for the 235delC mutation, we analyzed single nucleotide polymorphisms in the vicinity of the GJB2 gene. Results were consistent with inheritance of the 235delC mutation from a common ancestor. The results of this study have important implications for genetic diagnostic testing for deafness in the Japanese population.",4
"Fibromyalgia-like symptoms associated with irritable bowel syndrome: A challenging diagnosis of late-onset Pompe disease. || Adult Diagnosis, Differential Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Fibromyalgia Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Irritable Bowel Syndrome Pregnancy Pregnancy Complications || Late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder which usually presents as a limb-girdle myopathy with early respiratory involvement. We report 2 sisters with an uncommon presentation of LOPD characterized by fibromyalgia-like pain associated with irritable bowel syndrome. In both sisters, clinical examination was normal and had remained stable for 10 years. The serum creatine kinase level was mildly elevated. Several muscle biopsies showed slight nonspecific myopathic abnormalities. A dried blood spot test indicated acid maltase deficiency. The diagnosis of LOPD was confirmed genetically. Both sisters subsequently developed proximal muscle weakness after pregnancy and started enzyme replacement therapy. Under treatment, gastrointestinal symptoms improved, but pain persisted. Clinicians should be aware of this atypical presentation of LOPD to enable earlier diagnosis and treatment.",3 1 4
"Haplotype analyses, mechanism and evolution of common double mutants in the human LDL receptor gene. || Coronary Disease Evolution, Molecular Family Characteristics Haplotypes Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Linkage Disequilibrium Musculoskeletal Diseases Mutant Proteins Mutation Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Receptors, LDL Sequence Analysis, DNA Spain Tendons Xanthomatosis || Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), an autosomal dominant inherited disorder resulting in increased levels of circulating plasma low-density lipoprotein (LDL), tendon xanthomas and premature coronary artery disease (CAD), is caused by defects in the LDL receptor gene (LDLR). Three widespread LDLR alterations not causing FH (c.1061-8T>C, c.2177C>T and c.829G>A) and one mutation (c.12G>A) with narrow geographical distribution and thought to cause disease were investigated. In an attempt to improve knowledge on their origin, spread and possible selective effects, estimations of the ages of these variants (t generations) and haplotype analysis were performed by genotyping 86 healthy individuals and 98 FH patients in Spain for five LDLR SNPs: c.81T>C, c.1413G>A, c.1725C>T, c.1959T>C, and c.2232G>A; most patients carried two of these LDLR variants simultaneously. It was found that both the c.1061-8T>C (t = 54) and c.2177C>T alterations (t = 62) arose at about the same time (54 and 62 generations ago, respectively) in the CGCTG haplotype, while the c.12G>A mutation (t = 70) appeared in a CGCCG haplotype carrying an earlier c.829G>A alteration (t = 83). The estimated ages of selectively neutral alterations could explain their distribution by migrations. The origin of the c.12G>A mutation could be in the Iberian Peninsula; despite its estimated age, a low selective pressure could explain its conservation in Spain from where it could have spread to China and Mexico, since the sixteenth century through the Spanish/Portuguese colonial expeditions.",4
"Assessment of diastolic function with Doppler tissue imaging to predict genotype in preclinical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adult Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Diastole Echocardiography, Doppler Electrocardiography Female Genotype Humans Male Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains || Unexplained left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is considered diagnostic of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) but fails to identify all genetically affected individuals. Altered diastolic function has been hypothesized to represent an earlier manifestation of HCM before the development of LVH; however, data regarding the clinical utility of imaging techniques that assess this parameter are limited. Echocardiographic studies including Doppler tissue imaging (DTI) were performed in a genotyped HCM population with beta-myosin heavy chain (beta -MHC) mutations. Genotype (+) individuals with LVH (G+/LVH+; n=18) and genotype (+) individuals without LVH (G+/LVH-; n=18) were compared with normal control subjects (n=36). Left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) was significantly higher in both genotype (+) groups (75+/-5% and 71+/-6%, respectively, versus 64+/- 5% in control subjects; P<0.0001). Mean early diastolic myocardial velocities (Ea) were significantly lower in both genotype (+) subgroups, irrespective of LVH (P<0.02). However, there was substantial overlap in Ea velocities between the G+/LVH- and control groups. An Ea velocity of < or =13.5 cm/s had 86% specificity and 75% sensitivity for identifying genotype-positive subjects. The combination of EF > or =68% and Ea velocity <15 cm/s was 100% specific and 44% sensitive in predicting affected genotype. Abnormalities of diastolic function assessed by Doppler tissue imaging precede the development of LVH in individuals with HCM caused by beta -MHC mutations. Although Ea velocity alone was not sufficiently sensitive as a sole diagnostic criterion, the combination of Ea velocity and EF was highly predictive of affected genotype in individuals without overt manifestations of HCM.",2 4
"Mutation at the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) and its use to document population genetic variation: the Quebec experience. || Alleles Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors Chromosomes, Human, Pair 12 Databases, Factual Genetic Variation Haplotypes Homozygote Humans Mutation Phenylalanine Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Phenylketonurias Polymorphism, Genetic Quebec || We describe variation at the PAH locus in the population of Quebec. We successfully analyzed 135 of 141 chromosomes from phenylketonuria (PKU) probands (95.7% of the sample), and eight additional chromosomes from a small number of probands with non-PKU hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA). The full set of chromosomes harboured 45 different PAH mutations: i) seven polymorphisms (IVS2nt19, IVS3nt-22, IVS6nt-55, Q232Q, V245V, L385L, Y414Y); ii) four mutations causing non-PKU HPA (T92I, E390G, R408Q, D415N); iii) 34 mutations causing PKU. Only six mutations (M1V, R261Q, F299C, S349P, R408W and IVS12nt1) occurred in the whole province at relative frequencies > 5%: most are rare and probably identical by descent. By studying associations of mutations with polymorphic haplotype alleles, we found examples of mutations on different haplotypes that were identical by state, but not by descent because they were recurrent mutations (E280K and R408W); and examples of mutations identical both by state and by descent because of intragenic recombination (S67P, G218V, V245A and IVS12nt1). Ten mutations were first described in Quebec and five are still unique there; three of these 'Quebec' mutations are reported here for the first time (c.125A-->T (K42I); [c.470G-->A; c.471A--C] (R157N); c.707nt-55 (IVS6nt-55). The PAH mutations stratify by geographic region and population, their distributions validating hypotheses about European range expansion to North America during three separate phases of immigration and demographic expansion in the Quebec region over the past four centuries. The PAH homozygosity value (j) is 0.06 for the total Quebec sample (0.5-0.08 by regions), and the corresponding homoallelic fraction of mutant PAH genotypes is 24%. These findings are a documentation of genetic diversity in the Quebec population.",3 4
"Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: distribution of disease genes, spectrum of mutations, and implications for a molecular diagnosis strategy. || Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Carrier Proteins Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Humans Molecular Diagnostic Techniques Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Prognosis || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is an autosomal-dominant disorder in which 10 genes and numerous mutations have been reported. The aim of the present study was to perform a systematic screening of these genes in a large population, to evaluate the distribution of the disease genes, and to determine the best molecular strategy in clinical practice. The entire coding sequences of 9 genes (MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNI3, TNNT2, MYL2, MYL3, TPM1, ACTC, andTNNC1) were analyzed in 197 unrelated index cases with familial or sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Disease-causing mutations were identified in 124 index patients ( approximately 63%), and 97 different mutations, including 60 novel ones, were identified. The cardiac myosin-binding protein C (MYBPC3) and beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH7) genes accounted for 82% of families with identified mutations (42% and 40%, respectively). Distribution of the genes varied according to the prognosis (P=0.036). Moreover, a mutation was found in 15 of 25 index cases with ""sporadic"" hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (60%). Finally, 6 families had patients with more than one mutation, and phenotype analyses suggested a gene dose effect in these compound-heterozygous, double-heterozygous, or homozygous patients. These results might have implications for genetic diagnosis strategy and, subsequently, for genetic counseling. First, on the basis of this experience, the screening of already known mutations is not helpful. The analysis should start by testing MYBPC3 and MYH7 and then focus on TNNI3, TNNT2, and MYL2. Second, in particularly severe phenotypes, several mutations should be searched. Finally, sporadic cases can be successfully screened.",4
"BAG3-related myofibrillar myopathy in a Chinese family. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Amino Acid Sequence Apoptosis Regulatory Proteins Asian Continental Ancestry Group Child Female Humans Molecular Sequence Data Muscular Diseases Mutation Myofibrils || In contrast to the usual slow disease progression in myofibrillar myopathies, patients with Bag3opathy often have a rapidly progressive and more severe phenotype with a worse prognosis. We describe a Chinese patient, born to non-consanguineous parents, who first presented at age 6 with clumsy walking and difficult climbing staircase. With a history of restrictive lung disease previously diagnosed as asthma, she progressed rapidly with proximal myopathy, rigid spine and bilateral tightening of the Achilles tendons requiring surgical elongation. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with restrictive physiology was shown by echocardiogram. Moreover, prolonged QT interval was also noted in the patient. Family history was unremarkable yet her father was incidentally found to have prolonged QT interval. Mutation analysis with genomic DNA of the proband showed heterozygous de novo known mutation c.626C>T (p.Pro209Leu) and a germline variation c.772C>T (p.Arg258Trp) in BAG3. Her father was found to be a carrier of c.772C>T. Muscle biopsy findings were suggestive of myofibrillar myopathy on light microscopy and ultrastructural studies. To our knowledge, this is the first Chinese case of Bag3opathy so far reported.",4
"Low-density lipoprotein receptor gene mutation analysis and clinical correlation in Belgian hypercholesterolaemics. || Adolescent Adult Aged Belgium Child Coronary Disease Female Humans Hypercholesterolemia Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Receptors, LDL Regression Analysis Risk Factors || It is generally believed that patients with familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) have a higher cardiovascular risk than hypercholesterolaemics without a defect in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene. However, no conclusive evidence to support this view has yet been presented. We investigated this aspect in Belgian hyperlipidaemics as part of a comprehensive effort to determine the impact of FH in this population. DNA samples of 98 unrelated Belgian patients with a family history of autosomal dominant hypercholesterolaemia were screened for mutations in the LDLR gene, after exclusion of known mutations causing familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 (FDB). Eight of the 22 distinct LDLR gene mutations identified in 27 subjects have not previously been described in other populations. As expected, the mutation-positive patients had a significantly worse lipid profile than the mutation-negative subjects (p<0.05), but this did not correlate with clinical cardiovascular status. In conclusion, the presence of a mutation in the LDLR gene was not a reliable predictor of cardiovascular risk in the hyperlipidaemic subjects included in this study. However, it is possible that prolonged exposure to the high levels of LDL cholesterol in genetically proven FH patients will in future cause a higher incidence of coronary heart disease. Our data may reflect the genetic heterogeneity of inherited hypercholesterolaemia, recently shown to be caused by several major genes.",4
"New ABCC8 mutations in relapsing neonatal diabetes and clinical features. || ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1 Female Genetic Carrier Screening Humans Infant, Newborn Insulin Male Mutation Potassium Channels Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying Receptors, Drug Recurrence Sulfonylurea Receptors || Activating mutations in the ABCC8 gene that encodes the sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1) regulatory subunit of the pancreatic islet ATP-sensitive K(+) channel (K(ATP) channel) cause both permanent and transient neonatal diabetes. Recently, we have described the novel mechanism where basal Mg-nucleotide-dependent stimulatory action of SUR1 on the Kir6.2 pore is increased. In our present study, we identified six new heterozygous ABCC8 mutations, mainly in patients presenting the transient form of neonatal diabetes (six of eight), with a median duration of initial insulin therapy of 17 months (range 0.5-38.0). Most of these mutations map to key functional domains of SUR1. Whereas Kir6.2 mutations are a common cause of permanent neonatal diabetes and in a few cases associate with the DEND (developmental delay, epilepsy, and neonatal diabetes) syndrome, SUR1 mutations are more frequent in transient (52%) compared with permanent (14%) neonatal diabetes cases screened for ABCC8 in our series. Although ketoacidosis is frequent at presentation, SUR1 mutations associate mainly with transient hyperglycemia, with possible recurrence later in life. One-half of the SUR1 neonatal diabetic patients presented with de novo mutations. In some familial cases, diabetes is not always present in the adult carriers of SUR1 mutations, supporting variability in their clinical expressivity that remains to be fully explained.",4
"Genetic variants associated with gastrointestinal symptoms in Fabry disease. || ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily B, Member 11 Adult Fabry Disease Female Gastrointestinal Diseases Genetic Variation Genotyping Techniques Humans Male Middle Aged Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Precision Medicine || Gastrointestinal symptoms (GIS) are often among the earliest presenting events in Fabry disease (FD), an X-linked lysosomal disorder caused by the deficiency of α-galactosidase A. Despite recent advances in clinical and molecular characterization of FD, the pathophysiology of the GIS is still poorly understood. To shed light either on differential clinical presentation or on intervariability of GIS in FD, we genotyped 1936 genetic markers across 231 genes that encode for drug-metabolizing enzymes and drug transport proteins in 49 FD patients, using the DMET Plus platform. All nine single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) mapped within four genes showed statistically significant differences in genotype frequencies between FD patients who experienced GIS and patients without GIS: ABCB11 (odd ratio (OR) = 18.07, P = 0,0019; OR = 8.21, P = 0,0083; OR=8.21, P = 0,0083; OR = 8.21, P = 0,0083),SLCO1B1 (OR = 9.23, P = 0,0065; OR = 5.08, P = 0,0289; OR = 8.21, P = 0,0083), NR1I3 (OR = 5.40, P = 0,0191) and ABCC5 (OR = 14.44, P = 0,0060). This is the first study that investigates the relationships between genetic heterogeneity in drug absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion (ADME) related genes and GIS in FD. Our findings provide a novel genetic variant framework which warrants further investigation for precision medicine in FD.",3 4
"A molecular analysis of the GAA gene and clinical spectrum in 38 patients with Pompe disease in Japan. ||  || Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by acid α-glucosidase (GAA) deficiency, which results in the accumulation of glycogen in lysosomes in multiple tissues, including cardiac, skeletal, and smooth muscle cells. Thus far, 558 sequence variants of the GAA gene have been published in the Pompe Disease Mutation Database, and some mutations appear with considerable frequency in particular ethnic groups, such as Caucasians, Taiwanese, Chinese, and Koreans. However, the GAA mutation pattern in Japanese patients remains poorly understood. We analyzed the relationship between the genetic and clinical features of 38 mostly Japanese patients with Pompe disease from 35 unrelated families. We identified 28 different GAA gene mutations, including 7 novel mutations, by a GAA gene analysis. c.546G > T (22.9%) and c.1857C > G (14.3%) were the most common mutations and accounted for 37.1% of the total mutant alleles. In the six patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD), c.1857C > G was also the most common mutation. In addition, there were 13 homozygotes (5 with the c.546G > T) among the 35 families, which is the highest frequency reported thus far. Regarding the initial symptoms, cardiomegaly was the most common (3/6 = 50%) in IOPD patients, while muscle weakness was observed the most frequently in patients with late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) (15/30 = 50%). Notably, all IOPD patients who showed respiratory distress at the time of onset require respiratory assistance at present (4/4 = 100%). Regarding the presenting symptoms, cardiomegaly (6/6 = 100%) and hepatomegaly (4/6 = 66.7%) were more commonly seen in IOPD, and muscle weakness (24/29 = 82.7%) was observed more frequently in LOPD. Respiratory assistance is required at present in 33.3% of IOPD patients and 50% of LOPD patients, and 20% of IOPD patients and 29.6% of LOPD patients are wheelchair users. These individual clinical courses may be influenced by the timing of the diagnosis and treatment; for example, in 2007, an ERT orphan drug for treatment of Pompe disease, Alglucosidase alfa, was made available in Japan, and there were 5 (5/6 = 83.3%) wheelchair users diagnosed from 2008 to 2009 (cases 32-38) and 4 (4/27 = 14.8%) from 2010 to 2015 (cases 1-31). These findings underscore the importance of the early diagnosis and treatment.",3 1 4
"Enhanced human brain associative plasticity in Costello syndrome. ||  || Costello syndrome (CS) is a rare multiple congenital anomaly disorder which is caused by germline mutations in the v-Ha-ras Harvey rat sarcoma viral oncogene homologue (HRAS) proto-oncogene. Experimental data suggest perturbing effects of the mutated protein on the functional and structural organization of networks of cerebral cortex and on the activity-dependent strengthening of synaptic transmission known as long term potentiation (LTP). In five patients with molecularly proven diagnosis of CS and in a group of 13 age-matched control subjects we investigated activity-dependent synaptic plasticity. To this end, we used a paired associative stimulation (PAS) protocol, in which left ulnar nerve stimuli were followed by transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) pulses to right cortical hand area, and recorded motor evoked potentials (MEPs) by single pulse TMS from left first dorsal interosseus (FDI) muscle before and after PAS. In 4 out of 5 CS patients and in a subgroup of nine control subjects we also evaluated the time course and the topographical specificity of PAS after-effects. In these two subgroups, MEPs were measured before, immediately after and 30 min after PAS in the left FDI and left abductor pollicis brevis (APB). While the PAS protocol led to a 65% increase of the FDI MEP amplitude in controls, the LTP-like phenomenon was significantly more pronounced in CS patients, with motor responses increased by 230%. In addition, CS patients showed a similar MEP increase in both muscles while control subjects showed a slight increase in APB and only immediately after PAS. We hypothesize that the extremely enhanced PAS after-effects could be due to the influence of HRAS activity on the susceptibility of synapses to undergo LTP.",4
"LEOPARD syndrome with partly normal skin and sex chromosome mosaicism. || Adolescent Humans LEOPARD Syndrome Male Mosaicism Point Mutation Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Skin XYY Karyotype || We report on a family with LEOPARD syndrome which was molecularly proven (p.Thr468Met in PTPN11) in a father and his adult son. The father had multiple lentigines dispersed equally over his body; the son was similarly affected except for the left part of thorax, back and left arm, which were completely devoid of lentigines and only showed a few nevi. In addition, the son was found to have a mosaic karyotype, 47,XYY/46,XY, in lymphocytes. Skin biopsies from the pigmented and unpigmented forearm showed that mainly a 47,XYY karyotype was present in the pigmented skin and mainly a 46,XY karyotype in the unpigmented skin. In both fibroblast cultures the PTPN11 mutation was present, and no additional mutation could be detected. We discuss the various possible explanations for this phenotype, which include the possibility of coincidence; revertant mosaicism; silencing of a second PTPN11 mutation; gene(s) located on a sex chromosome influencing the phenotype; and epigenetic influences. We favor that the co-occurrence of a sex chromosome mosaicism and mosaicism for skin symptoms in a single patient with LEOPARD syndrome is coincidence, but that mosaicism for LEOPARD skin symptoms in itself may well be more frequent and needs additional studies. Each of the above-hypothesized mechanisms may then remain possible.",2 4
"Clinical challenges of genotype positive (+)-phenotype negative (-) family members in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Electrocardiography Family Genetic Testing Genotype Humans Magnetic Resonance Imaging Mutation Phenotype Sarcomeres || ",2 4
"Genetic mutations of GJB2 and mitochondrial 12S rRNA in nonsyndromic hearing loss in Jiangsu Province of China. || Adolescent Adult Case-Control Studies Child Child, Preschool China Connexin 26 Connexins DNA, Mitochondrial Deafness Female Heterozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Mitochondria Mutation Nucleic Acid Conformation Phylogeny RNA, Messenger RNA, Ribosomal Sequence Analysis, DNA Young Adult || Hearing loss is caused by several environmental and genetic factors and the proportion attributed to inherited causes is assumed at 50 ~ 60% . Mutations in GJB2 and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 12S rRNA are the most common molecular etiology for nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss (NSHL). The mutation spectra of these genes vary among different ethnic groups. To add the molecular etiologic information of hearing loss in the Chinese population, a total of 658 unrelated patients with NSHL from Jiangsu Province of China were selected for mutational screening including GJB2 and mtDNA 12S rRNA genes using PCR and DNA sequencing technology. As for controls, 462 normal-hearing individuals were collected. A total of 9 pathogenic mutations in the GJB2 and 7 pathogenic mutations in the 12S rRNA gene were identified. Of all patients, 70 had monoallelic GJB2 coding region mutation in the heterozygous state, 94 carried two confirmed pathogenic mutations including 79 homozygotes and 15 compound heterozygotes. The 235delC appears to be the most common deafness-causing GJB2 mutation (102/658, 15.50% ). No mutations or variants in the GJB2 exon1 and basal promoter region were found. In these patients, 4 subjects carried the m.1494C > T mutation (0.61% ) and 39 subjects harbored the m.1555A > G mutation (5.93% ) in mtDNA 12S rRNA gene. A novel sequence variant at m.1222A > G in the 12S rRNA gene was identified, which could alter the secondary structure of the 12S rRNA. The mutation spectrum and prevalence of GJB2 and mtDNA 12S rRNA genes in Jiangsu population are similar to other areas of China. There are in total 31.46% of the patients with NSHL carry deafness-causing mutation in GJB2 or mtDNA 12S rRNA genes. Mutation in GJB2 gene is the most common factor, mtDNA 12S rRNA also plays an important part in the pathogenesis of hearing loss in Jiangsu Province areas. The m.1222A > G was found to be a new candidate mutation associated with hearing loss. Our results indicated the necessity of genetic screening for mutations of these genes in Jiangsu patients with NSHL.",4
"A Comparison of Whole Genome Sequencing to Multigene Panel Testing in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Patients. || Aged Algorithms Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins European Continental Ancestry Group Female Filamins Gene Duplication Genetic Testing Genetic Variation Humans Male Middle Aged Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases Whole Genome Sequencing || As DNA sequencing costs decline, genetic testing options have expanded. Whole exome sequencing and whole genome sequencing (WGS) are entering clinical use, posing questions about their incremental value compared with disease-specific multigene panels that have been the cornerstone of genetic testing. Forty-one patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy who had undergone targeted hypertrophic cardiomyopathy genetic testing (either multigene panel or familial variant test) were recruited into the MedSeq Project, a clinical trial of WGS. Results from panel genetic testing and WGS were compared. In 20 of 41 participants, panel genetic testing identified variants classified as pathogenic, likely pathogenic, or uncertain significance. WGS identified 19 of these 20 variants, but the variant detection algorithm missed a pathogenic 18 bp duplication in myosin binding protein C (MYBPC3) because of low coverage. In 3 individuals, WGS identified variants in genes implicated in cardiomyopathy but not included in prior panel testing: a pathogenic protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 11 (PTPN11) variant and variants of uncertain significance in integrin-linked kinase (ILK) and filamin-C (FLNC). WGS also identified 84 secondary findings (mean=2 per person, range=0-6), which mostly defined carrier status for recessive conditions. WGS detected nearly all variants identified on panel testing, provided 1 new diagnostic finding, and allowed interrogation of posited disease genes. Several variants of uncertain clinical use and numerous secondary genetic findings were also identified. Whereas panel testing and WGS provided similar diagnostic yield, WGS offers the advantage of reanalysis over time to incorporate advances in knowledge, but requires expertise in genomic interpretation to appropriately incorporate WGS into clinical care. URL: https://clinicaltrials.gov. Unique identifier: NCT01736566.",4
"Loss-of-function mutations in MC4R are very rare in the Greek severely obese adult population. || Aged Body Fat Distribution Case-Control Studies Female Greece Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Obesity, Morbid Pedigree Phenotype Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Sequence Analysis Signal Transduction || Melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) loss-of-function mutations are the commonest genetic cause of human monogenic obesity, so far. The contribution of MC4R coding mutations to severe obesity in the high-obesity prone Greek population has not been investigated to date. We determined the MC4R coding sequence of 510 obese and 469 lean control subjects of Greek origin, and we estimated the prevalence and the penetrance on obesity of MC4R loss-of-function mutations. The functional impact of novel nonsynonymous variants detected was investigated in vitro. We found two novel synonymous mutations (L23L and I102I), four nonsynonymous mutations (T112M, S127L, N274S, and S295L), and two polymorphisms (V103I and I251L) previously described in literature. We also detected a novel mutation (L207V) in a severely obese 69-year-old female patient, although the mutation did not cosegregate with obesity in the corresponding pedigree and had no functional consequences on MC4R protein function. Loss-of-function mutations represented 75% of all nonsynonymous rare mutations identified among lean carriers and only 25% among obese subjects (P = 0.0001). The prevalence of loss-of-function mutations was lower in the obese group than in lean control subjects (0.20 vs. 0.64%) but this difference was not significant. Therefore, the estimated penetrance of deleterious MC4R mutations was very low (6.3%) in heterozygous Greek carriers of MC4R loss-of-function mutations. Our data suggest that MC4R loss-of-function mutations are rare in the Greek population. MC4R genetic deficiency is unlikely to explain the high propensity to develop severe obesity in this specific population.",4
"High frequency of mutations in MODY and mitochondrial genes in Scandinavian patients with familial early-onset diabetes. || Adult Age Factors Aged Aged, 80 and over Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Leucine Zipper Transcription Factors DNA, Mitochondrial DNA-Binding Proteins Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Exons Family Female Genetic Variation Glucokinase Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-alpha Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4 Humans Introns Male Middle Aged Mutation Nuclear Proteins Pedigree Phosphoproteins Point Mutation Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Promoter Regions, Genetic Scandinavian and Nordic Countries Sequence Deletion Transcription Factors || To investigate the contribution of mutations in maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and mitochondrial genes to early-onset diabetes with a strong family history of diabetes in a cohort with a high prevalence of Type I (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus. Screening for sequence variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha (MODY1), glucokinase (MODY2), HNF-1alpha (MODY3) genes and mitochondrial DNA was carried out in 115 Finnish and Swedish patients with early-onset ( </= 40 years) diabetes using the single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) technique and direct sequencing. Allele frequencies were compared with 118 patients with onset of diabetes Type II (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus after the age of 40 and 92 non-diabetic control subjects without a family history of diabetes. In total 52 sequence variants were found in the HNF-1alpha, HNF-4alpha and glucokinase genes, 12 of which were considered as MODY mutations. Three families had the A3243G mutation in the mitochondrial tRNA(Leu) gene, which resulted in an overall prevalence of these mutations of 13 %. Among 115 Scandinavian families, mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene represented the most common cause of familial early-onset ( </= 40 years) diabetes: MODY3 (5.2 %) more than MODY2 (3.5 %) more than MIDD (2.6 %) more than MODY1 (1.7 %).",2 4
"Carrier frequency of GJB2 (connexin-26) mutations causing inherited deafness in the Korean population. || Connexin 26 Connexins DNA Mutational Analysis Deafness Genetic Carrier Screening Genetic Predisposition to Disease Humans Infant, Newborn Mutation Neonatal Screening || Mutations in the GJB2 gene are associated with hereditary hearing loss. Although most studies of GJB2 mutations have dealt with hearing-impaired patients, there are few reports of the frequency of these mutations in the general population. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the prevalence of GJB2 mutations causing inherited deafness in the general Korean population. Blood samples were obtained from 2,072 newborns with normal hearing. The dried blood samples were subjected to PCR to amplify the entire coding region of the GJB2 gene, which was followed by direct DNA sequencing. A total of 24 different sequence variants were identified in the coding region of GJB2, including eight pathogenic mutations (p.V37I, p.G45E, p.R143 W, c.176_191del16, c.235delC, c.292_298dup7, c.299_300delAT and c.605ins46), four polymorphisms (p.V27I, p.E114G, p.G160S and p.I203T), six unclassified variants (p.G4D, p.S85Y, p.T123 N, p.R127H, p.A171T and p.F191L) and six novel variants (p.W3T, p.I20L, p.K41E, c.147C > T, c.186C > T and c.576A > G). Pathogenic mutations causing inherited deafness were identified in 3% (62/2,072) of the newborns with normal hearing. Of the eight pathogenic mutations found, p.V37I was the most common (1.35%, 28/2,072), followed by c.235delC (1.25%, 26/2,072). These data provide information about carrier frequency for GJB2-based hearing loss and have important implications for genetic diagnostic testing for inherited deafness in the Korean population.",4
"Subset of individuals with autism spectrum disorders and extreme macrocephaly associated with germline PTEN tumour suppressor gene mutations. || Adolescent Amino Acid Sequence Animals Autistic Disorder Child Child, Preschool Craniofacial Abnormalities Female Genes, Tumor Suppressor Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phenotype Sequence Alignment Sequence Homology || The genetic aetiology of autism remains elusive. Occasionally, individuals with Cowden syndrome (a cancer syndrome) and other related hamartoma disorders such as Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, Proteus syndrome, and Proteus-like conditions, are characterised by germline PTEN mutations, and may have neurobehavioural features resembling autism as well as overgrowth and macrocephaly. Therefore, we undertook PTEN gene mutation analysis in 18 subjects mainly prospectively ascertained with autism spectrum disorder and macrocephaly. Of these 18 autistic subjects (13 males and five females; ages 3.1-18.4 years) with a head circumference range from 2.5 to 8.0 standard deviations above the mean, three males (17%) carried germline PTEN mutations. These three probands had previously undescribed PTEN mutations: H93R (exon 4), D252G (exon 7), and F241S (exon 7). They had the larger head circumference measurements amongst all our study subjects. The three residues altered in our patients were highly evolutionarily conserved. We suggest that PTEN gene testing be considered for patients with autistic behaviour and extreme macrocephaly. The gene findings may impact on recurrence risks as well as medical management for the patient.",3 4
"Molecular and functional characterization of a human frataxin mutation found in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins DNA Mutational Analysis Friedreich Ataxia Gene Frequency Heterozygote Humans In Vitro Techniques Iron-Binding Proteins Mutation Myocardium Phenotype Sarcomeres || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is associated with marked genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity. Pathogenic mutations in the 10 hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-associated sarcomeric genes cause autosomal dominant disease as a rule, although recessive disease has been reported. Cardiac hypertrophy is also a hallmark of Friedreich ataxia, an autosomal recessive disease caused by deficiency of the mitochondrial protein frataxin. We hypothesized that heterozygous mutations in frataxin may mimic or modify hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Using DHPLC and DNA sequencing, we identified the novel R40C-frataxin mutation in a patient who also harbored a previously reported R810H-myosin binding protein C mutation. The R810H mutation is reported to cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy only in the setting of homozygosity or compound heterozygosity with another sarcomeric mutation. Site-directed mutagenesis and in vitro and in vivo analysis enabled functional characterization of the mutant frataxin protein. R40C-frataxin protein is not cleaved to the mature form in vitro and shows delayed kinetics of cleavage by isolated mouse mitochondria. Yeast cells expressing R40C-frataxin demonstrated increased sensitivity to oxidative stress and abnormal accumulation of precursor frataxin protein. These data indicate that frataxin deficiency may have contributed to this patient's particular phenotype. Furthermore, these findings suggest that mutations altering myocyte energetics may act in synergy with sarcomeric mutations to cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.",4
"Mutation Analysis of the Common Deafness Genes in Patients with Nonsyndromic Hearing Loss in Linyi by SNPscan Assay. || Adolescent Adult Child Child, Preschool Connexins DNA Mutational Analysis Female Hearing Loss Humans Infant Male Membrane Transport Proteins Mutation Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Sulfate Transporters || Hearing loss is a common sensory disorder, and at least 50% of cases are due to a genetic etiology. Although hundreds of genes have been reported to be associated with nonsyndromic hearing loss, GJB2, SLC26A4, and mtDNA12SrRNA are the major contributors. However, the mutation spectrum of these common deafness genes varies among different ethnic groups. The present work summarized mutations in these three genes and their prevalence in 339 patients with nonsyndromic hearing loss at three different special education schools and one children's hospital in Linyi, China. A new multiplex genetic screening system ""SNPscan assay"" was employed to detect a total of 115 mutations of the above three genes. Finally, 48.67% of the patients were identified with hereditary hearing loss caused by mutations in GJB2, SLC26A4, and mtDNA12SrRNA. The carrying rate of mutations in the three genes was 37.76%, 19.75%, and 4.72%, respectively. This mutation profile in our study is distinct from other parts of China, with high mutation rate of GJB2 suggesting a unique mutation spectrum in this area.",4
"Clinical features of familial hypercholesterolemia in Korea: Predictors of pathogenic mutations and coronary artery disease - A study supported by the Korean Society of Lipidology and Atherosclerosis. || Adult Aged Apolipoproteins B Atherosclerosis Cholesterol, LDL Coronary Artery Disease Female Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases ROC Curve Receptors, LDL Regression Analysis Republic of Korea Risk Factors Sensitivity and Specificity Serine Endopeptidases || Proper screening and diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is of critical importance for cardiovascular prevention. However, the clinical diagnosis of FH remains difficult partly because its phenotype can vary between different ethnicities. The aim of this study was to determine the clinical features and the best diagnostic approach in Korean FH patients. The predictors of putative pathogenic mutations and coronary artery disease (CAD) were also identified. Ninety-seven patients with low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol >190 mg/dL and xanthoma or FH-compatible family history were included. Putative pathogenic mutations in LDLR, APOB, or PCSK9 genes were identified in 32% of the enrolled patients. The subjects were classified according to four sets of clinical criteria (Simon Broome, Dutch, MEDPED, Japanese). The mutation rates in definite type FH of Simon Broome or Dutch criteria were 35%-37% and lower in our patients than in those of other countries. The mutation detection rate by MEDPED criteria was 67%-75% and higher than those based on other criteria. The best low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-C) threshold for predicting mutations was 225 mg/dL. LDL-C was found to be the only independent predictor of mutation carriers, while hypertension and low high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol were predictive of CAD. The conventional clinical criteria showed limited mutation detection power and low specificities in Korean FH patients, in whom the best LDL-C threshold for putative mutation was 225 mg/dL. Traditional cardiovascular risk factors were also significantly associated with CAD risk in this population.",4
"High frequency of RUNX1 biallelic alteration in acute myeloid leukemia secondary to familial platelet disorder. || Adult Blood Platelet Disorders Child Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit Family Female Gene Frequency Homozygote Humans Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute Male Middle Aged Pedigree Precancerous Conditions Young Adult || Familial platelet disorder (FPD), a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by quantitative and qualitative platelet abnormalities, is considered as a model of genetic predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). So far, monoallelic RUNX1 germline mutations have been found in 19 of 20 families with reported FPD, and the analysis of blast cells from only 5 patients at acute leukemia (AL) stage has shown no additional RUNX1 abnormality. Here, we performed RUNX1 analysis at constitutional and somatic levels in 8 persons with FPD who developed AL from 4 independent families. In addition to the germline RUNX1 mutation, we identified a second RUNX1 alteration in 6 AML cases (acquired point mutations in 4 cases and duplication of the altered RUNX1 allele associated with acquired trisomy 21 in 2 other cases). Although haploinsufficiency of RUNX1 causes FPD, our findings suggest that a second genetic event involving RUNX1 is often associated with progression to AML.",2 4
"Germline p53 mutations in a cohort with childhood sarcoma: sex differences in cancer risk. || Adolescent Adult Aging Amino Acid Substitution Bone Neoplasms Child Child, Preschool Codon Cohort Studies Exons Female Genes, p53 Genetic Carrier Screening Germ-Line Mutation Humans Infant Male Middle Aged Risk Factors Sarcoma Sequence Deletion Sex Characteristics Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 || To characterize cancer risk in heterozygous p53 mutation carriers, we analyzed cancer incidence in 56 germline p53 mutation carriers and 3,201 noncarriers from 107 kindreds ascertained through patients with childhood soft-tissue sarcoma who were treated at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. We systematically followed members in these kindreds for cancer incidence for >20 years and evaluated their p53 gene status. We found seven kindreds with germline p53 mutations that include both missense and truncation mutation types. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed similar cancer risks between 21 missense and 35 truncation p53 mutation carriers (log-rank chi(2)=0.04; P=.84). We found a significantly higher cancer risk in female carriers than in male carriers (log-rank chi(2)=12.1; P<.001), a difference not explained by an excess of sex-specific cancer. The calculated standardized incidence ratio (SIR) showed that mutation carriers had a risk for all types of cancer that was much higher than that for the general population (SIR = 41.1; 95% confidence interval [CI] 29.9-55.0) whereas noncarriers had a risk for all types of cancer that was similar to that in the general population (SIR = 0.9; 95% CI 0.8-1.0). The calculated SIRs showed a >100-fold higher risk of sarcoma, female breast cancer, and hematologic malignancies for the p53 mutation carriers and agreed with the findings of an earlier segregation analysis based on the same cohort. These results quantitatively illustrated the spectrum of cancer risk in germline p53 mutation carriers and will provide valuable reference for the evaluation and treatment of patients with cancer.",2 4 3
"A clinical scoring system for selection of patients for PTEN mutation testing is proposed on the basis of a prospective study of 3042 probands. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Child Cohort Studies Female Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male Middle Aged Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases Models, Genetic PTEN Phosphohydrolase Patient Selection Promoter Regions, Genetic Prospective Studies Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt Young Adult || Cowden syndrome (CS) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome are allelic, defined by germline PTEN mutations, and collectively referred to as PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome. To date, there are no existing criteria based on large prospective patient cohorts to select patients for PTEN mutation testing. To address these issues, we conducted a multicenter prospective study in which 3042 probands satisfying relaxed CS clinical criteria were accrued. PTEN mutation scanning, including promoter and large deletion analysis, was performed for all subjects. Pathogenic mutations were identified in 290 individuals (9.5%). To evaluate clinical phenotype and PTEN genotype against protein expression, we performed immunoblotting (PTEN, P-AKT1, P-MAPK1/2) for a patient subset (n = 423). In order to obtain an individualized estimation of pretest probability of germline PTEN mutation, we developed an optimized clinical practice model to identify adult and pediatric patients. For adults, a semiquantitative score-the Cleveland Clinic (CC) score-resulted in a well-calibrated estimation of pretest probability of PTEN status. Overall, decreased PTEN protein expression correlated with PTEN mutation status; decreasing PTEN protein expression correlated with increasing CC score (p < 0.001), but not with the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) criteria (p = 0.11). For pediatric patients, we identified highly sensitive criteria to guide PTEN mutation testing, with phenotypic features distinct from the adult setting. Our model improved sensitivity and positive predictive value for germline PTEN mutation relative to the NCCN 2010 criteria in both cohorts. We present the first evidence-based clinical practice model to select patients for genetics referral and PTEN mutation testing, further supported biologically by protein correlation.",3 4
"Application of SNPscan in Genetic Screening for Common Hearing Loss Genes. || Aged Aged, 80 and over Connexins Genetic Testing Genotyping Techniques Hearing Loss Humans Membrane Transport Proteins Middle Aged Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Sulfate Transporters || The current study reports the successful application of a fast and efficient genetic screening system for common hearing loss (HL) genes based on SNPscan genotyping technology. Genetic analysis of 115 variants in common genes related to HL, GJB2, SLC26A4 and MT-RNR, was performed on 695 subjects with non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) from the Northern China. The results found that 38.7% (269/695) of cases carried bi-allelic pathogenic variants in GJB2 and SLC26A4 and 0.7% (5/695) of cases carried homoplasmic MT-RNR1 variants. The variant allele frequency of GJB2, SLC26A4 and MT-RNR1 was 19.8% (275/1390), 21.9% (304/1390), and 0.86% (6/695), respectively. This approach can explain ~40% of NSHL cases and thus is a useful tool for establishing primary molecular diagnosis of NSHL in clinical genetics.",4
"Characterization of mutations in the low density lipoprotein (LDL)-receptor gene in patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, and frequency of these mutations in FH patients in the United Kingdom. || Adolescent Adult Base Sequence Child Female Gene Deletion Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Phenotype Point Mutation Receptors, LDL United Kingdom || Mutations in the gene for the low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor have been identified in 15 patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). Five patients are homozygous at the LDL-receptor locus; their mutant alleles include Glu387Lys and Pro664Leu in patients of Asian-Indian descent, Cys292Stop in a Greek Cypriot, Cys281Trp in a Turkish patient, and Gln 540Stop in a West Indian. The other 10 patients (9 of apparently British ancestry) are compound heterozygotes. Mutations have been identified in 18 of 20 possible alleles, including Glu80Lys (2 patients), Pro664Leu (3 patients), Asp69Gly, Cys176Arg, Cys227Tyr, Ser265Arg, Asp280Ala, Asp283Glu, Arg329Pro, Asp461Asn, Leu578Ser, a single bp deletion in exon 15, a 21 bp duplication of codons 200-206 and two large deletions. The seven mutations underlined above have not been described previously. The two uncharacterized mutant alleles fail to produce detectable amounts of mRNA. LDL-receptor activity in cultured cells from 13 of the 15 homozygous patients varied from undetectable to about 30% of normal, but there was no correlation between LDL-receptor activity and the untreated plasma cholesterol concentration in these patients. When genomic DNA from 295 patients with a clinical diagnosis of FH was screened for 29 mutations found in these and other FH patients of British ancestry, most were identified in only one or a few individuals. Four patients heterozygous for the Asp461Asn allele showed a wide range of clinical manifestations. These observations confirm the striking heterogeneity underlying FH in most populations and demonstrate the variability in phenotype between patients with the same mutation.",2 4 3
"Later-onset Pompe disease: early detection and early treatment initiation enabled by newborn screening. || Adolescent Adult Biopsy Cardiomyopathies Creatine Kinase Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Fibroblasts Glycogen Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Humans Infant, Newborn Lipids Male Middle Aged Mutation Neonatal Screening Skin alpha-Glucosidases || To determine whether newborn screening facilitates early detection and thereby early treatment initiation for later-onset Pompe disease. We have conducted a newborn screening program since 2005. Newborns with deficient skin fibroblast acid α-glucosidase activity and two acid α-glucosidase gene mutations but no cardiomyopathy were defined as having later-onset Pompe disease, and their motor development and serum creatine kinase levels were monitored every 3 to 6 months. Among 344 056 newborns, 13 (1 in 26 466) were found to have later-onset Pompe disease. During a follow-up period of up to 4 years, four patients were treated because of hypotonia, muscle weakness, delayed developmental milestones/motor skills, or elevated creatine kinase levels starting at the ages of 1.5, 14, 34, and 36 months, respectively. Muscle biopsy specimens obtained from the treated patients revealed increased storage of glycogen and lipids. Newborn screening was found to facilitate the early detection of later-onset Pompe disease. A subsequent symptomatic approach then identifies patients who need early treatment initiation.",3 1 4
"Effects of myosin variants on interacting-heads motif explain distinct hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy phenotypes. || Cardiomyopathy, Dilated Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Humans Models, Molecular Myocardial Contraction Protein Binding Ventricular Myosins || Cardiac β-myosin variants cause hypertrophic (HCM) or dilated (DCM) cardiomyopathy by disrupting sarcomere contraction and relaxation. The locations of variants on isolated myosin head structures predict contractility effects but not the prominent relaxation and energetic deficits that characterize HCM. During relaxation, pairs of myosins form interacting-heads motif (IHM) structures that with other sarcomere proteins establish an energy-saving, super-relaxed (SRX) state. Using a human β-cardiac myosin IHM quasi-atomic model, we defined interactions sites between adjacent myosin heads and associated protein partners, and then analyzed rare variants from 6112 HCM and 1315 DCM patients and 33,370 ExAC controls. HCM variants, 72% that changed electrostatic charges, disproportionately altered IHM interaction residues (expected 23%; HCM 54%, p=2.6×10-19; DCM 26%, p=0.66; controls 20%, p=0.23). HCM variant locations predict impaired IHM formation and stability, and attenuation of the SRX state - accounting for altered contractility, reduced diastolic relaxation, and increased energy consumption, that fully characterizes HCM pathogenesis.",4
"Melanocortin-4 Receptor Gene Variation Is Associated with Eating Behavior in Chilean Adults. ||  || To evaluate the association between allelic variants of melanocortin receptors -3 and -4 (MC3R and MC4R, respectively) and leptin receptor (LEPR) genes with body mass index (BMI) and eating behavior. We selected 344 Chilean adults (57.8% women; age 39.1 ± 6.6 years) with a wide variation in BMI (30.3 ± 6.3 kg/m²). The Three-Factor Eating Questionnaire-R18 that measures uncontrolled eating (UE), emotional eating (EE) and cognitive restraint scores was adapted, validated and assessed for association with BMI. Genotypes were determined by polymerase chain reaction followed by restriction fragment length polymorphism techniques and Taqman assays. Higher EE scores were found in obese vs. non-obese in both men (p = 0.01) and women (p < 0.001). UE scores were significantly associated with BMI only in women (p = 0.002). No significant differences in eating behavior scores or BMI were found by LEPR (rs1137101, rs8179183 and rs1137100 polymorphisms) or MC3R (rs3746619 and rs3827103). Carriers of the C allele for MC4R rs17782313 showed significantly higher scores of UE compared to non-carriers (2.3 ± 0.8 vs. 2.0 ± 0.7; p = 0.02). Additionally, we also report a monogenic case of obesity carrying the pathogenic mutation 449C>T (Thr150Ile) in MC4R gene with no apparent alterations in eating behavior scores. UE scores were higher in C-allele carriers of MC4R-rs17782313 compared to non-carriers.",4
"Multigene panels in Ashkenazi Jewish patients yield high rates of actionable mutations in multiple non-BRCA cancer-associated genes. || Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Family Health Female Genes, BRCA1 Genes, BRCA2 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Humans Jews Male Middle Aged Multigene Family Mutation Neoplasms || To evaluate the results of multigene panel testing among Ashkenazi Jewish compared with non-Ashkenazi Jewish patients. We reviewed the medical records for all patients who underwent multigene panel testing and targeted BRCA1/2 testing at a single institution between 6/2013-1/2015. Clinical actionability for identified pathogenic mutations was characterized based on the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines and consensus statements and expert opinion for genes not addressed by these guidelines. Four hundred and fifty-four patients underwent multigene panel screening, including 138 Ashkenazi Jewish patients. The median patient age was fifty-two years. Three hundred and fifty-four patients (78%) had a personal history of cancer. Two hundred and fifty-one patients had breast cancer, 49, ovarian cancer, 26, uterine cancer and 20, colorectal cancer. We identified 62 mutations in 56 patients and 291 variants of uncertain significance in 196 patients. Among the 56 patients with mutations, 51 (91%) had actionable mutations. Twenty mutations were identified by multigene panels among Ashkenazi Jewish patients, 18 of which were in genes other than BRCA1/2. A review of targeted BRCA1/2 testing performed over the same study period included 103 patients and identified six mutations in BRCA1/2, all of which occurred in Ashkenazi Jewish patients. Among all Ashkenazi Jewish patients undergoing genetic testing, 25/183 (14%) had a mutation, 24/25 of which were actionable (96%) and 17/25 patients (68%) had mutations in non BRCA1/2 genes. With the rapid acceptance of multigene panels there is a pressing need to understand how this testing will affect patient management. While traditionally many Ashkenazi Jewish patients have undergone targeted BRCA1/2 testing, our data suggest consideration of multigene panels in this population as the majority of the results are clinically actionable and often in genes other than BRCA1/2.",4
"Mutation screening in patients for familial hypercholesterolaemia (ADH). || Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Mutation Receptors, LDL United Kingdom || ",4
"Diagnostic dilemmas in Fabry disease: a case series study on GLA mutations of unknown clinical significance. || Adolescent Adult Aged Biopsy Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic, Familial Fabry Disease Female Globosides Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Retrospective Studies Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease' (FD) phenotype is heterogeneous: alpha-galactosidase A gene mutations (GLA) can lead to classical or non-classical FD, or no FD. The aim of this study is to describe pitfalls in diagnosing non-classical FD and assess the diagnostic value of plasma globotriaosylsphingosine. This is a case series study. Family 1 (p.A143T) presented with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), absent classical FD signs, high residual alpha-galactosidase A activity (AGAL-A) and normal plasma globotriaosylsphingosine. Co-segregating sarcomeric mutations were found. Cardiac biopsy excluded FD. In family 2 (p.P60L), FD was suspected after kidney biopsy in a female with chloroquine use. Males had residual AGAL-A, no classical FD signs and minimally increased plasma globotriaosylsphingosine, indicating that p.P60L is most likely non-pathogenic. Non-specific complications and histology can be explained by chloroquine and alternative causes. Males of two unrelated families (p.R112H) show AGAL-A <5%, but slightly elevated plasma globotriaosylsphingosine (1.2-2.0 classical males >50 nmol/l). Histological evidence suggests a variable penetrance of this mutation. Patients with GLA mutations and non-specific findings such as HCM may have non-classical FD or no FD. Other (genetic) causes of FD-like findings should be excluded, including medication inducing FD-like storage. Plasma globotriaosylsphingosine may serve as a diagnostic tool, but histology of an affected organ is often mandatory.",2 4 0 3
"Cardio-facio-cutaneous and Noonan syndromes due to mutations in the RAS/MAPK signalling pathway: genotype-phenotype relationships and overlap with Costello syndrome. || Abnormalities, Multiple Adolescent Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Diagnosis, Differential Face Female Genes, ras Genotype Heart Defects, Congenital Humans Infant Intellectual Disability MAP Kinase Kinase 1 MAP Kinase Kinase 2 MAP Kinase Signaling System Male Mutation, Missense Noonan Syndrome Phenotype Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf Signal Transduction Skin Abnormalities Syndrome || Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome, Noonan syndrome (NS), and Costello syndrome (CS) are clinically related developmental disorders that have been recently linked to mutations in the RAS/MEK/ERK signalling pathway. This study was a mutation analysis of the KRAS, BRAF, MEK1 and MEK2 genes in a total of 130 patients (40 patients with a clinical diagnosis of CFC, 20 patients without HRAS mutations from the French Costello family support group, and 70 patients with NS without PTPN11 or SOS1 mutations). BRAF mutations were found in 14/40 (35%) patients with CFC and 8/20 (40%) HRAS-negative patients with CS. KRAS mutations were found in 1/40 (2.5%) patients with CFC, 2/20 (10%) HRAS-negative patients with CS and 4/70 patients with NS (5.7%). MEK1 mutations were found in 4/40 patients with CFC (10%), 4/20 (20%) HRAS-negative patients with CS and 3/70 (4.3%) patients with NS, and MEK2 mutations in 4/40 (10%) patients with CFC. Analysis of the major phenotypic features suggests significant clinical overlap between CS and CFC. The phenotype associated with MEK mutations seems less severe, and is compatible with normal mental development. Features considered distinctive for CS were also found to be associated with BRAF or MEK mutations. Because of its particular cancer risk, the term ""Costello syndrome"" should only be used for patients with proven HRAS mutation. These results confirm that KRAS is a minor contributor to NS and show that MEK is involved in some cases of NS, demonstrating a phenotypic continuum between the clinical entities. Although some associated features appear to be characteristic of a specific gene, no simple rule exists to distinguish NS from CFC easily.",4
"Application of molecular genetics for diagnosing familial hypercholesterolemia in Norway: results from a family-based screening program. || Biomarkers Disease Management Family Health Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Lipids Molecular Biology Norway || A total of 119 different mutations in the low-density lipoprotein-receptor gene have so far been found to cause familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) among Norwegian patients. As of April 2003, 2390 patients from 959 unrelated families were provided with a molecular genetic diagnosis. Of these, 25.3% had xanthomas and 8.4% had xanthelasma. During the last 2-3 years, a systematic family-based program to identify close relatives of FH patients has been established. A total of 851 relatives of 188 index patients have undergone genetic testing. Four hundred seven people (47.9%) were affected, and 444 (52.1%) were unaffected. Only 41.5% of those affected were on lipid-lowering drugs, and only 6.1% had a value for total serum cholesterol below 193 mg/dL (5.0 mmol/L). A follow-up study was conducted in 146 of 407 affected relatives 6 months after genetic testing was performed. Of those already under treatment at the time of genetic testing, nonsignificant reductions of total serum cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol of 3.2% and 7.1% were observed. Of those not under treatment who were aged 18 years and older, the corresponding reductions were 21.2% (p <.0001) and 30.0% (p <.0001), respectively. We conclude that molecular genetic methods represent a feasible and highly efficient tool in a family-based strategy to diagnose FH.",2 4
"Clinical spectrum of obesity and mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor gene. || Adolescent Age of Onset Amino Acid Sequence Body Composition Child Energy Metabolism Female Genotype Growth Humans Hyperinsulinism Hyperphagia Male Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Obesity Pedigree Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 Receptors, Corticotropin || Melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) deficiency is the commonest monogenic form of obesity. However, the clinical spectrum and mode of inheritance have not been defined, pathophysiological mechanisms leading to obesity are poorly understood, and there is little information regarding genotype-phenotype correlations. We determined the nucleotide sequence of the MC4R gene in 500 probands with severe childhood obesity. Family studies were undertaken to examine cosegregation of identified mutations with obesity. Subjects with MC4R deficiency underwent metabolic and endocrine evaluation; the results were correlated with the signaling properties of mutant receptors. Twenty-nine probands (5.8 percent) had mutations in MC4R; 23 were heterozygous, and 6 were homozygous. Mutation carriers had severe obesity, increased lean mass, increased linear growth, hyperphagia, and severe hyperinsulinemia; homozygotes were more severely affected than heterozygotes. Subjects with mutations retaining residual signaling capacity had a less severe phenotype. Mutations in MC4R result in a distinct obesity syndrome that is inherited in a codominant manner. Mutations leading to complete loss of function are associated with a more severe phenotype. The correlation between the signaling properties of these mutant receptors and energy intake emphasizes the key role of this receptor in the control of eating behavior in humans.",2 4 0
"Comparison of SSCP and DHPLC for the detection of LDLR mutations in a New Zealand cohort. ||  || Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is a common inherited disorder, associated with premature vascular disease. FH may be caused by many different mutations in the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene, about 700 mutations have been described, most of which occur rarely and often only in single families. Although particular mutations are prevalent in certain ethnic groups, countries with heterogeneous population bases (such as NZ) may carry a wide variety of mutations; making a gene screening approach the appropriate first step for a mutation detection programme. We have compared SSCP with DHPLC to assess their effectiveness as methods for LDLR mutation detection. Although five novel LDLR mutations were detected by SSCP in patients with FH, DHPLC was more sensitive, with eight novel mutations detected. Six of these mutations (T392M, R419G, Y421N, 1206-1207delCT, 1872delC, and 1943delC) were clustered in exons 9 and 13 of the EGF precursor homology domain, one (679-680delAC) in the ligand binding domain (exon 4) and the eighth (P774H) in the membrane-spanning domain (exon 16). Twenty five mutations were identified in 35 patients in total. Of these, we were able to detect only 64% of mutations by SSCP even though all variants were detected by DHPLC. All patients are heterozygous for the mutations, which is consistent with the clinical phenotypes.",4
"Genetic Analysis and Follow-Up of 25 Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus Patients in China. || Blood Glucose China Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1 Female Follow-Up Studies Genotype Glyburide Glycated Hemoglobin A Humans Hypoglycemic Agents Infant Insulin KATP Channels Male Mutation Phenotype Prognosis || To study the clinical features, genetic etiology, and the correlation between phenotype and genotype of neonatal diabetes mellitus (NDM) in Chinese patients. We reviewed the medical records of 25 NDM patients along with their follow-up details. Molecular genetic analysis was performed. We compared the HbA1c levels between PNDM group and infantile-onset T1DM patients. Of 25 NDM patients, 18 (72.0%) were PNDM and 7 (28.0%) were TNDM. Among 18 PNDM cases, 6 (33.3%) had known KATP channel mutations (KATP-PNDM). There were six non-KATP mutations, five novel mutations, including INS, EIF2AK3 (n = 2), GLIS3, and SLC19A2, one known EIF2AK3 mutation. There are two ABCC8 mutations in TNDM cases and one paternal UPD6q24. Five of the six KATP-PNDM patients were tried for glyburide transition, and 3 were successfully switched to glyburide. Mean HbA1c of PNDM was not significantly different from infantile onset T1DM (7.2% versus 7.4%, P = 0.41). PNDM accounted for 72% of NDM patients. About one-third of PNDM and TNDM patients had KATP mutations. The genetic etiology could be determined in 50% of PNDM and 43% of TNDM cases. PNDM patients achieved good glycemic control with insulin or glyburide therapy. The etiology of NDM suggests polygenic inheritance.",4
"Missense mutation of the beta-cardiac myosin heavy-chain gene in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. ||  || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy occurs as an autosomal dominant familial disorder or as a sporadic disease without familial involvement. We describe a missense mutation of the beta-cardiac myosin heavy chain (MHC) gene, a G to T transversion (741 Gly-->Trp) identified by direct sequencing of exon 20 in four individuals affected with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Three individuals with sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, whose parents are clinically and genetically unaffected, had sequence variations of exon 34 of the alpha-cardiac MHC gene (a C to T transversion, 1658 Asp-->Asp, resulting in FokI site polymorphism), of intron 33 of the alpha-cardiac MHC gene (a G to A and an A to T transversion), and also of intron 14 of the beta-cardiac MHC gene (a C to T transversion in a patient with Noonan syndrome). Including our case, 30 missense mutations of the beta-cardiac MHC gene in 49 families have been reported thus far worldwide. Almost all are located in the region of the gene coding for the globular head of the molecule, and only one mutation was found in both Caucasian and Japanese families. Missense mutations of the beta-cardiac MHC gene in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may therefore differ according to race.",2 4
"Correlation of SPECT imaging, biochemical parameters and mutation with systolic dysfunction. ||  || We investigated systolic dysfunction by the use of biochemical laboratory tests and perfusion single-photon emission computed tomography imaging in 32 Pakistani subjects exhibiting symptoms of this disorder. To investigate underlying genetic causes, such as familial hypercholesterolemia, DNA samples from these subjects were screened by PCR-SSCP and DNA sequencing to detect changes in the low density lipoprotein receptor gene (LDLR). A novel mutation (1171G>A) in exon 8 and two polymorphisms (1167G>A and 1413 A>G) in exons 8 and 10 of the LDLR gene were found. In silico tools such as SIFT, PolyPhen-2, KD4v, and Project HOPE were used to predict the effect of this mutation on protein structure and function.",4
"Occurrence of acute lymphoblastic leukemia and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia in a patient with Noonan syndrome carrying the germline PTPN11 mutation p.E139D. || Comparative Genomic Hybridization Female Germ-Line Mutation Heterozygote Humans Infant Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Juvenile Noonan Syndrome Precursor Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 || Noonan syndrome (NS) is a common autosomal dominant condition characterized by short stature, congenital heart defects, and dysmorphic facial features caused in approximately 50% of cases by missense mutations in the PTPN11 gene. NS patients are predisposed to malignancies including myeloproliferative disorders or leukemias. We report a female NS patient carrying a PTPN11 germline mutation c.417 G > C (p.E139D), who developed in her second year of life an acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and after remission, she developed at 4 years of age a juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). Molecular genetic analysis of lymphoblastic blasts at the time of the ALL diagnosis revealed the germline mutation in a heterozygous state, while in the myelomonocytic blasts occurring with JMML diagnosis, the mutation p.E139D was found in a homozygous state due to a uniparental disomy (UPD). These findings lead to the suggestion that the pathogenesis of ALL and JMML in our patient is due to different mechanisms including somatically acquired secondary chromosomal abnormalities.",2 4
"The role of common and rare MC4R variants and FTO polymorphisms in extreme form of obesity. || Aged Alpha-Ketoglutarate-Dependent Dioxygenase FTO Animals Body Mass Index Female Heterozygote Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation, Missense Obesity Pedigree Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Proteins Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4 || Melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) is an important regulator of food intake and number of studies report genetic variations influencing the risk of obesity. Here we explored the role of common genetic variation from MC4R locus comparing with SNPs from gene FTO locus, as well as the frequency and functionality of rare MC4R mutations in cohort of 380 severely obese individuals (BMI > 39 kg/m(2)) and 380 lean subjects from the Genome Database of Latvian Population (LGDB). We found correlation for two SNPs--rs11642015 and rs62048402 in the fat mass and obesity-associated protein (FTO) with obesity but no association was detected for rs17782313 located in the MC4R locus in these severely obese individuals. We sequenced the whole gene MC4R coding region in all study subjects and found five previously known heterozygous non-synonymous substitutions V103I, I121T, S127L, V166I and I251L. Expression in mammalian cells showed that the S127L, V166I and double V103I/S127L mutant receptors had significantly decreased quantity at the cell surface compared to the wild type MC4R. We carried out detailed functional analysis of V166I that demonstrated that, despite low abundance in plasma membrane, the V166I variant has lower EC50 value upon αMSH activation than the wild type receptor, while the level of AGRP inhibition was decreased, implying that V166I cause hyperactive satiety signalling. Overall, this study suggest that S127L may be the most frequent functional MC4R mutation leading to the severe obesity in general population and provides new insight into the functionality of population based variants of the MC4R.",4
"Spectrum of mutations in PTPN11 and genotype-phenotype correlation in 96 patients with Noonan syndrome and five patients with cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome. || DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genotype Humans Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Male Noonan Syndrome Phenotype Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11 Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Sequence Analysis, DNA || Noonan syndrome (NS) is a relatively common, but genetically heterogeneous autosomal dominant malformation syndrome. Characteristic features are proportionate short stature, dysmorphic face, and congenital heart defects. Only recently, a gene involved in NS could be identified. It encodes the non-receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, which is an important molecule in several intracellular signal transduction pathways that control diverse developmental processes, most importantly cardiac semilunar valvulogenesis. We have screened this gene for mutations in 96 familial and sporadic, well-characterised NS patients and identified 15 different missense mutations in a total of 32 patients (33%), including 23 index patients. Most changes clustered in one exon which encodes parts of the N-SH2 domain. Five of the mutations were recurrent. Interestingly, no mutations in the PTPN11 gene were detected in five additional patients with cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome, which shows clinical similarities to NS.",2 4
"Mutational analysis of JAK2, CBL, RUNX1, and NPM1 genes in familial aggregation of hematological malignancies. || Adolescent Adult Aged Cohort Studies Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Variation Hematologic Neoplasms Humans Janus Kinase 2 Male Middle Aged Nuclear Proteins Pedigree Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-cbl || Familial aggregation of hematological malignancies has been reported highlighting inherited genetic predisposition. In this study, we targeted four candidate genes: JAK2 and RUNX1 genes assuring a prominent function in hematological process and CBL and NPM1 as proto-oncogenes. Their disruption was described in several sporadic hematological malignancies. The aim of this study is to determine whether JAK2, CBL, RUNX1, and NPM1 germline genes mutations are involved in familial hematological malignancies. Using direct sequencing, we analyzed JAK2 (exons 12 and 14); CBL (exons 7, 8 and 9); NPM1 (exon 12) and the entire RUNX1 in 88 independent families belonging to Tunisian and French populations. Twenty-one sporadic acute leukemias were included in this study. We reported a heterozygous intronic c.1641 + 6 T > C JAK2 variant (rs182123615) found in two independent familial cases diagnosed with gastric lymphoma and Hodgkin lymphoma. The in silico analysis suggested a potential impact on splicing, but the functional splicing minigene reporter assay on rs182123615 variant showed no aberrant transcripts. In one sporadic acute myeloblastic leukemia, we reported an insertion 846 in. TGTT in exon 12 of NPM1 gene that may impact the normal reading frame. The rs182123615 JAK2 variant was described in several contexts including myeloproliferative neoplasms and congenital erythrocytosis and was supposed to be pathogenic. Through this current study, we established the assessment of pathogenicity of rs182123615 and we classified it rather as rare polymorphism.",4
"Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer: translation of CDH1 germline mutations into clinical practice. || Antigens, CD Cadherins Carcinoma, Signet Ring Cell Gastrectomy Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation Humans Penetrance Prognosis Risk Factors Stomach Neoplasms || Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is the only known cancer syndrome that is dominated by gastric adenocarcinoma. HDGC is caused by germline mutation of the CDH1 gene that encodes the cell adhesion protein E-cadherin. Mutation carriers have a more than 70% lifetime risk of developing DGC and an elevated risk of lobular breast cancer. Intestinal-type gastric cancer is not part of the syndrome. Clinical management of HDGC involves predictive genetic testing beginning at or near 16 years of age. It is recommended that mutation carriers undergo prophylactic gastrectomy after about 20 years of age. Anatomical mapping has demonstrated that mutation carriers develop multifocal stage T1a signet ring cell carcinomas, with up to several hundred foci being observed in single stomachs. These foci develop following the somatic inactivation of the second CDH1 allele by mechanisms that include DNA promoter hypermethylation.",4
"Prophylactic total gastrectomy for individuals with germline CDH1 mutation. || Adult Anastomosis, Roux-en-Y Antigens, CD Cadherins Female Gastrectomy Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male Middle Aged Stomach Neoplasms || Germline mutation of the CDH1 gene, which encodes for the E-cadherin adhesion protein, is rare but confers an estimated lifetime risk of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer of 87%. Fewer than 100 prophylactic total gastrectomies have been reported for this condition. Patients with germline CDH1 mutation who underwent multidisciplinary counseling followed by prophylactic total gastrectomy were reviewed. Ten patients (6 male, 4 female) with a median age of 42 years (range, 26-51) underwent prophylactic total gastrectomy between 2006 and 2009. Of the 6 families represented, there were 4 missense, 1 frameshift, and 1 splice site mutation. Median time from genetic testing to surgery was 3 months (range, 1-7). All patients had an upper endoscopy before surgery, identifying only 1 patient with a focus of diffuse gastric cancer. After prophylactic total gastrectomy, extensive pathologic analysis demonstrated that 9 patients had up to 77 foci of noninvasive cancer, and 2 of these patients had 4-12 foci of T1 invasive cancer. Median operative time was 213 minutes; there were no anastomotic leaks, and the length of stay was 7-8 days. One patient had a complication within 30 days (pulmonary embolism), and 3 patients had late complications (2 small bowel obstructions and 1 anastomotic stricture). Median weight loss at 6 months was 19%. The majority of patients with germline CDH1 mutation have foci of noninvasive or invasive gastric cancer by middle age. Serial upper endoscopies provide inadequate screening. Prophylactic total gastrectomy is the procedure of choice for definitive treatment.",3 4
"Functional and Clinical Consequences of Novel α-Galactosidase A Mutations in Fabry Disease. || Adolescent Adult Amino Acid Substitution Cell Line Child Child, Preschool Databases, Genetic Enzyme Activation Fabry Disease Female Gene Expression Genetic Association Studies Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease (FD) is a rare metabolic disorder of glycosphingolipid storage caused by mutations in the GLA gene encoding lysosomal hydrolase α-galactosidase A (α-gal A). Recently, the diagnostic procedure for FD has advanced in several ways, through the development of a specific biomarker (lyso-Gb3) and the implementation of newborn screenings, which acted as a catalyst to augment general awareness of the disease. Heterologous over-expression of α-gal A variants and subsequent in vitro measurement of enzyme activity provided molecular data to elucidate the relationship between mutation, enzyme damage, lyso-Gb3 biomarker levels, and clinical phenotype. This knowledge is the foundation for improved counseling with regard to prognosis and therapeutic decisions. Herein, we resume the approach of in vitro characterization, with a further 73 mainly novel GLA gene mutations. Patient lyso-Gb3 data were available for most of the mutations. All mutations were tested for responsiveness to pharmacological chaperone treatment and phenotypic data for 61 hemizygous male and 116 heterozygous female patients carrying a mutation associated with ≥ 20% residual activity, formerly classified as ""mild"" variant, were collected in order to evaluate the pathogenicity. We conclude that a mild GLA variant is typically characterized by high residual enzyme activity and normal biomarker levels. We found evidence that these variants can still be classified as a distinctive, but milder, sub-type of FD.",3 4 0
"Somatic mosaicism for an HRAS mutation causes Costello syndrome. ||  || De novo heterozygous HRAS point mutations have been reported in more than 81 patients with Costello syndrome (CS), but genotype/phenotype correlation remains incomplete because the majority of patients share a common mutation, G12S, seen in 65/81 (80%). Somatic HRAS mutations have previously been identified in solid tumors, and mutation hot spots related to a gain-of-function effect of the gene product are known. The germline mutations causing CS occur at these hot spots and convey a gain-of-function effect, thus accounting for the greatly increased cancer risk. Diagnostic testing for HRAS mutations is now available and the identification of a mutation in a patient with consistent clinical findings confirms a diagnosis of CS. It is not clear yet if the absence of an HRAS mutation precludes a diagnosis of CS. Because there is a significant overlap in the clinical findings of Costello, cardio-facio-cutaneous, and Noonan syndromes, diagnostic uncertainty remains in patients lacking an HRAS mutation. We report here on a female with findings suggestive of CS in whom mutation analysis performed with standard techniques on white blood cell derived DNA did not show an HRAS mutation. However, analysis of DNA derived from three independently collected buccal swabs showed a sequence change qualitatively consistent with the G12S mutation. Allelic quantitation showed the presence of the mutation in approximately 25%-30% of the sampled buccal cells. In this patient, standard technology failed to identify the disease causing mutation on DNA derived from a blood sample, highlighting the potential pitfalls in the interpretation of negative mutation studies. This is the first reported CS patient mosaic for the common HRAS mutation, likely due to a somatic mutation occurring very early in fetal development.",4
"Frequency of Usher syndrome in two pediatric populations: Implications for genetic screening of deaf and hard of hearing children. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adolescent Cadherins Connexin 26 Connexin 30 Connexins Extracellular Matrix Proteins Female Genetic Testing Humans Male Microarray Analysis Mutation Myosins Oregon Prevalence Sequence Analysis, DNA Surveys and Questionnaires Usher Syndromes Young Adult || Usher syndrome is a major cause of genetic deafness and blindness. The hearing loss is usually congenital and the retinitis pigmentosa is progressive and first noticed in early childhood to the middle teenage years. Its frequency may be underestimated. Newly developed molecular technologies can detect the underlying gene mutation of this disorder early in life providing estimation of its prevalence in at risk pediatric populations and laying a foundation for its incorporation as an adjunct to newborn hearing screening programs. A total of 133 children from two deaf and hard of hearing pediatric populations were genotyped first for GJB2/6 and, if negative, then for Usher syndrome. Children were scored as positive if the test revealed > or =1 pathogenic mutations in any Usher gene. Fifteen children carried pathogenic mutations in one of the Usher genes; the number of deaf and hard of hearing children carrying Usher syndrome mutations was 15/133 (11.3%). The population prevalence was estimated to be 1/6000. Usher syndrome is more prevalent than has been reported before the genome project era. Early diagnosis of Usher syndrome has important positive implications for childhood safety, educational planning, genetic counseling, and treatment. The results demonstrate that DNA testing for Usher syndrome is feasible and may be a useful addition to newborn hearing screening programs.",4
"Sudden cardiac death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Variability in phenotypic expression of beta-myosin heavy chain mutations. || Adolescent Adult Aged Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Death, Sudden, Cardiac Exons Female Genetic Carrier Screening Humans Male Middle Aged Myosins Pedigree Phenotype Polymerase Chain Reaction || Recent identification of mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene (MYH7), a major responsible gene for HCM, has provided the opportunity to characterize genotype-phenotype correlation in HCM families. In this study we analysed the phenotypic expression of two beta-myosin heavy chain (beta MHC) mutations in three unrelated HCM families. Living individuals from three unrelated HCM families (Families 1, 2, and 3) were screened by history, physical examination, electrocardiography, and two-dimensional echocardiography. Blood was collected from all individuals for DNA extraction. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), restriction endonuclease digestion and chemical cleavage were utilized for detection of mutations. All mutations were confirmed by sequence analysis. Identification of mutations: A missense mutation in exon 13 of the beta MHC gene (Arg403 Gln) was detected in HCM patients from Families 1 and 2. PCR amplification of the exon 13 DNA, followed by Ddel digestion of the PCR product and gel electrophoresis, showed two fragments of 84 and 70 bp in normal individuals and four fragments of 84, 70, 52 and 32 bp in HCM patients. Sequence analysis showed substitution of an adenine for guanine at coding position 1208. In Family 3, a missense mutation in exon 16 of the beta MHC gene (Val606 Met) was detected in HCM patients. Chemical cleavage of the PCR products showed an uncleaved product of 337 bp in the normal individuals, while in the affected individuals, in addition to the uncleaved product, a 90 bp cleaved product was also detected, indicating the presence of a mismatch in one allele. Sequence analysis showed substitution of an adenine for guanine in coding position 1817. Seven members of Family 1 had HCM, of whom five are alive. One patient died from sudden cardiac death (SCD) and another from recurrent cerebral emboli. In Family 2, 15 individuals had HCM of whom nine have died, seven from SCD. The mean age at the time of SCD was 33 years. The third family is comprised of 11 affected individuals and one obligate carrier, of whom one patient died at age 17 from progressive heart failure. Two additional individuals in this family have also succumbed to SCD to age 60. A variety of clinical and echocardiographic manifestations of HCM were present in each family. Logrank test of Kaplan-Meier survival curves indicates that Arg403 Gln mutation was associated with a poor prognosis in HCM families as compared to Val606 Met (P = 0.034). beta MHC mutations despite showing variable clinical and echocardiographic manifestations of HCM are predictors of survival in HCM families.",4
"Spectrum of LDL receptor gene mutations in heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. ||  || Familial hypercholesterolemia by usual definition reflects mutations of the LDL-receptor gene. Extensive molecular characterization of mutations ascertained mainly through homozygotes (the Dallas collection) has been presented by Hobbs et al. (Hum Mutat 1:445-446, 1992). This paper catalogues a spectrum of 134 mutations (27 novel mutations in 45 patients, 24 previously described mutations in 89 patients) ascertained through heterozygotes from the analysis of 791 patients with definite, probable, or possible FH, mainly from the UK, using high-throughput modifications of the single-strand conformation polymorphism technique. From a composite database of LDL receptor gene mutations complied from these two sets and from the literature, deductions are made about ascertainment bias, mutation rates, and molecular heterogeneity. Calculations suggest that there may be a large number of rare amino acid variants in the general population not causing classic FH. Approaches to, and feasibility of, molecular diagnostics are considered.",4
"Predominance of a 6 bp deletion in exon 2 of the LDL receptor gene in Africans with familial hypercholesterolaemia. || Adolescent Adult African Continental Ancestry Group Apolipoproteins B Child Child, Preschool DNA Mutational Analysis Exons Female Heteroduplex Analysis Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Introns Male Middle Aged Pedigree Point Mutation Polymorphism, Genetic Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Prevalence Promoter Regions, Genetic Receptors, LDL Sequence Deletion South Africa || In South Africa, the high prevalence of familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) among Afrikaners, Jews, and Indians as a result of founder genes is in striking contrast to its reported virtual absence in the black population in general. In this study, the molecular basis of primary hypercholesterolaemia was studied in 16 Africans diagnosed with FH. DNA analysis using three screening methods resulted in the identification of seven different mutations in the coding region of the low density lipoprotein (LDLR) gene in 10 of the patients analysed. These included a 6 bp deletion (GCGATG) accounting for 28% of defective alleles, and six point mutations (D151H, R232W, R385Q, E387K, P678L, and R793Q) detected in single families. The Sotho patient with missense mutation R232W was also heterozygous for a de novo splicing defect 313+1G-->A. Several silent mutations/polymorphisms were detected in the LDLR and apolipoprotein B genes, including a base change (g-->t) at nucleotide position -175 in the FP2 LDLR regulatory element. This promoter variant was detected at a significantly higher (p<0.05) frequency in FH patients compared to controls and occurred in cis with mutation E387K in one family. Analysis of four intragenic LDLR gene polymorphisms showed that the same chromosomal background was identified at this locus in the four FH patients with the 6 bp deletion. Detection of the 6 bp deletion in Xhosa, Pedi, and Tswana FH patients suggests that it is an ancient mutation predating tribal separation approximately 3000 years ago.",4
"Characteristics of maturity onset diabetes of the young in a large diabetes center. || Adolescent C-Peptide Child Colorado Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2 Female Humans Male Mutation || Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes caused by a mutation in a single gene, often not requiring insulin. The aim of this study was to estimate the frequency and clinical characteristics of MODY at the Barbara Davis Center. A total of 97 subjects with diabetes onset before age 25, a random C-peptide ≥0.1 ng/mL, and negative for all diabetes autoantibodies (GADA, IA-2, ZnT8, and IAA) were enrolled, after excluding 21 subjects with secondary diabetes or refusal to participate. Genetic testing for MODY 1-5 was performed through Athena Diagnostics, and all variants of unknown significance were further analyzed at Exeter, UK. A total of 22 subjects [20 (21%) when excluding two siblings] were found to have a mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A (n = 4), glucokinase (n = 8), or hepatocyte nuclear factor 1A (n = 10). Of these 22 subjects, 13 had mutations known to be pathogenic and 9 (41%) had novel mutations, predicted to be pathogenic. Only 1 of the 22 subjects had been given the appropriate MODY diagnosis prior to testing. Compared with MODY-negative subjects, the MODY-positive subjects had lower hemoglobin A1c level and no diabetic ketoacidosis at onset; however, these characteristics are not specific for MODY. In summary, this study found a high frequency of MODY mutations with the majority of subjects clinically misdiagnosed. Clinicians should have a high index of suspicion for MODY in youth with antibody-negative diabetes.",4
"Gene mutations in apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adult Aged Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins DNA Echocardiography Female Genetic Variation Humans Male Medical Records Middle Aged Muscle Proteins Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Retrospective Studies Sarcomeres Troponin T || Nonobstructive hypertrophy localized to the cardiac apex is an uncommon morphological variant of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) that often is further distinguished by distinct giant negative T waves and a benign clinical course. The genetic relationship between HCM with typical hypertrophic morphology versus isolated apical hypertrophy is incompletely understood. Genetic cause was investigated in 15 probands with apical hypertrophy by DNA sequence analyses of 9 sarcomere protein genes and 3 other genes (GLA, PRKAG2, and LAMP2) implicated in idiopathic cardiac hypertrophy. Six sarcomere gene mutations were found in 7 samples; no samples contained mutations in GLA, PRKAG2, or LAMP2. Clinical evaluations demonstrated familial apical HCM in 4 probands, and in 3 probands disease-causing mutations were identified. Two families shared a cardiac actin Glu101Lys missense mutation; all members of both families with clinical manifestations of HCM (n=16) had apical hypertrophy. An essential light chain missense mutation Met149Val caused apical or midventricular segment HCM in another proband and 5 family members, but 6 other affected relatives had typical HCM morphologies. No other sarcomere gene mutations identified in the remaining probands caused apical HCM in other family members. Sarcomere protein gene mutations that cause apical hypertrophy rather than more common HCM morphologies reflect interactions among genetic etiology, background modifier genes, and/or hemodynamic factors. Only a limited number of sarcomere gene defects (eg, cardiac actin Glu101Lys) consistently produce apical HCM.",4
"Transmission of the rare HRAS mutation (c. 173C > T; p.T58I) further illustrates its attenuated phenotype. || Abnormalities, Multiple Costello Syndrome DNA Mutational Analysis Family Genes, ras Humans Megalencephaly Mosaicism Mutation Phenotype || Costello syndrome was delineated based on its distinctive phenotype including severe failure-to-thrive with macrocephaly, characteristic facial features, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, papillomata, malignant tumors, and cognitive impairment. Heterozygous germline mutations in the proto-oncogene HRAS cause Costello syndrome, and its inheritance pattern would thus be autosomal dominant. With exception of two instances of parental mosaicism, one presumed gonadal and the other proven somatic mosaicism for the p.G12S change, all published cases resulted from de novo mutations, typically arising in the paternal germline. More than 90% of these mutations affect the glycine residues in position 12 or 13, and result in a gain-of-function of the altered protein. A rare heterozygous HRAS alteration (c.173C > T; p.T58I) associated with an attenuated phenotype was previously reported in one patient. We identified two additional individuals with this mutation, father and son. Further studies supported origin of the alteration in the grand-paternal germline. Transmission of the mutation underscores its attenuated phenotype compatible with reproduction. We reviewed the phenotype in the newly identified individuals (Patient 1, 2) and include updated information on the first previously reported individual with HRAS p.T58I (Patient 3). Macrocephaly was present in all three. Cardiac findings included hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with double-chambered right ventricle; or mitral valve prolapse in one patient each. While subtle neurologic abnormalities or developmental delay were present in all, only one showed significant cognitive and functional impairment. None developed papillomata or a malignant tumor. Genetic counseling for Costello syndrome needs to take into consideration the particular HRAS mutation.",4
"Cardiovascular risk assessment of dyslipidemic children: analysis of biomarkers to identify monogenic dyslipidemia. || Adolescent Biomarkers Cardiovascular Diseases Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies Environment Female Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Lipoproteins Male Risk Assessment Risk Factors || The distinction between a monogenic dyslipidemia and a polygenic/environmental dyslipidemia is important for the cardiovascular risk assessment, counseling, and treatment of these patients. The present work aims to perform the cardiovascular risk assessment of dyslipidemic children to identify useful biomarkers for clinical criteria improvement in clinical settings. Main cardiovascular risk factors were analyzed in a cohort of 237 unrelated children with clinical diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). About 40% carried at least two cardiovascular risk factors and 37.6% had FH, presenting mutations in LDLR and APOB. FH children showed significant elevated atherogenic markers and lower concentration of antiatherogenic particles. Children without a molecular diagnosis of FH had higher levels of TGs, apoC2, apoC3, and higher frequency of BMI and overweight/obesity, suggesting that environmental factors can be the underlying cause of their hypercholesterolem≥ia. An apoB/apoA1 ratio ≥0.68 was identified as the best biomarker (area under the curve = 0.835) to differentiate FH from other dyslipidemias. The inclusion in clinical criteria of a higher cut-off point for LDL cholesterol or an apoB/apoA1 ratio ≥0.68 optimized the criteria sensitivity and specificity. The correct identification, at an early age, of all children at-risk is of great importance so that specific interventions can be implemented. apoB/apoA1 can improve the identification of FH patients.",2 4
"Functional and biological studies of α-galactosidase A variants with uncertain significance from newborn screening in Taiwan. || Biological Assay Biomarkers Blood Specimen Collection Dried Blood Spot Testing Fabry Disease Female Humans Infant, Newborn Male Mutation Neonatal Screening Taiwan alpha-Galactosidase || Fabry disease is an X-linked disorder resulted from deficiency of α-galactosidase A (GLA) activity. In Taiwan, a total of 792,247 newborns were screened from 2008 to 2014 in two newborn screening centers, and 13 variants of uncertain significance (VOUS) in the GLA gene were identified. To determine whether these variants were pathogenic or not, functional, biochemical, clinical and pedigree analyses were performed. In vitro functional assay was established through site-directed mutagenesis, and four in silico tools were used to predict pathogenesis. The enzyme activity of dried blood spots and plasma metabolite lyso-Gb3 level from subjects with the variants were measured. Additionally, clinical manifestations were evaluated extensively from the subjects and their relatives. Our results revealed that p.G104V, p.I232T, p.D322H, and p.G360C all exhibited relatively low residual enzyme activities and elevated plasma lyso-Gb3 level. These data strongly suggest that these Fabry mutations may cause classical or later-onset phenotypes. In contrast, neither significantly clinical symptoms nor elevated lyso-Gb3 level was found in cases with p.P60S, p.A108T, p.S304T, p.R356Q, and p.P362T variants, which may be non-pathogenic or milder forms of Fabry variants. More data need to be included for the patients with p.N53D, p.P210S, p.M296L, and p.K391T variants. The established system provides us more information to classify these GLA variants.",2 4 0
PTEN germ-line mutations in juvenile polyposis coli. || Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Aged Genetic Variation Germ-Line Mutation Humans Male PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases Tumor Suppressor Proteins || ,3 4
"Prevalence and severity of ""benign"" mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain, cardiac troponin T, and alpha-tropomyosin genes in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Child, Preschool Cohort Studies DNA Mutational Analysis Disease Progression Female Genotype Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Middle Aged Minnesota Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Predictive Value of Tests Prevalence Tropomyosin Troponin T Ventricular Myosins || Genotype-phenotype correlative studies have implicated 8 particular mutations that cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) as ""benign defects,"" associated with near-normal survival: N232S, G256E, F513C, V606M, R719Q, and L908V of beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH7); S179F of troponin T (TNNT2); and D175N of alpha-tropomyosin (TPM1). Routine genetic screening of HCM patients for specific mutations is anticipated to provide important diagnostic and prognostic information. The frequency and associated phenotype of these mutations in a large, unselected cohort of HCM is unknown. A total of 293 unrelated HCM patients were genotyped for the presence of a benign mutation. DNA was obtained after informed consent; specific MHY7, TNNT2, and TPM1 fragments were amplified by polymerase chain reaction; and the mutations were detected by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and automated DNA sequencing. Only 5 (1.7%) of the 293 patients possessed a benign mutation. Moreover, all 5 subjects with an ascribed benign mutation had already manifested clinically severe expression of HCM, with all 5 requiring surgical myectomy, 3 of the 5 having a family history of sudden cardiac death, and 1 adolescent requiring an orthotopic heart transplant. These findings demonstrate the rarity of specific mutations in HCM and challenge the notion of mutation-specific clinical outcomes. Fewer than 2% of the subjects harbored a benign mutation, and those patients with a benign mutation experienced a very serious clinical course.",4
"Sarcomere protein gene mutations in patients with apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Adolescent Adult Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Echocardiography Electrocardiography Female Genetic Testing Genotype Humans Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular Male Middle Aged Muscle Proteins Mutation Sarcomeres || Apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a unique form of HCM with left ventricular hypertrophy confined to the cardiac apex. The purpose of our study was to report genetic findings in a large series of unrelated patients with apical HCM and compare them with a nonapical HCM cohort. Overall, 429 patients with HCM underwent genetic testing. The panel included 8 sarcomere protein genes and 3 other genes (GLA, PRKAG2, and LAMP2). Sixty-one patients were diagnosed with apical HCM. A positive genotype was found in 8 patients with apical HCM. The genotype-positive and genotype-negative patients had similar maximal wall thicknesses (17.5 ± 3.5 mm versus 17.6 ± 3.3 mm, P = 0.71) and similar frequency of HCM-related events (2/8; 25% versus 13/53; 25%; P = 0.98). Thirteen percent with apical HCM and 40% with nonapical HCM had a positive genotype (P<0.001) most often involving the MYBPC3 and MYH7 genes. In apical HCM, a positive genotype was found less frequently than in nonapical HCM, and it was most often involving MYBPC3 and MYH7 genes. Only 13% of patients with apical HCM were found to be genotype positive, indicating that genome-wide association studies and gene expression profiling are needed for better understanding of the genetic background of the disease. There was no significant genotype-phenotype correlation in our cohort with apical HCM.",4
"Update of the molecular basis of familial hypercholesterolemia in The Netherlands. ||  || Autosomal-dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH) has been identified as a major risk factor for coronary vascular disease (CVD) and is associated with mutations in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and the apolipoprotein B (APOB) gene. Since 1991 DNA samples from clinically diagnosed ADH patients have been routinely analyzed for the presence of LDLR and APOB gene mutations. As of 2001, 1,641 index patients (164 index patients per year) had been identified, while from 2001 onward a more sensitive, high-throughput system was used, resulting in the identification of 1,177 new index patients (average=294 index patients per year). Of these 1,177 index cases, 131 different causative genetic variants in the LDLR gene and six different causative mutations in the APOB gene were new for the Dutch population. Of these 131 mutations, 83 LDLR and four APOB gene mutations had not been reported before. The inclusion of all 2,818 index cases into the national screening program for familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) resulted in the identification of 7,079 relatives who carried a mutation that causes ADH. Screening of the LDLR and APOB genes in clinically diagnosed FH patients resulted in approximately 77% of the patients being identified as carriers of a causative mutation. The population of patients with ADH was divided into three genetically distinct groups: carriers of an LDLR mutation (FH), carriers of an APOB mutation (FDB), and non-LDLR/non-APOB patients (FH3). No differences were found with regard to untreated cholesterol levels, response to therapy, and onset of CVD. However, all groups were at an increased risk for CVD. Therefore, to ultimately identify all individuals with ADH, the identification of new genes and mutations in the genes that cause ADH is of crucial importance for the ongoing national program to identify patients with ADH by genetic cascade screening.",4
"Identification and characterization of two non-secreted PCSK9 mutants associated with familial hypercholesterolemia in cohorts from New Zealand and South Africa. || Adult Aged Amino Acid Sequence Amino Acid Substitution Animals Apolipoprotein B-100 Cohort Studies Female Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Middle Aged Molecular Sequence Data Mutation, Missense New Zealand Pedigree Proprotein Convertase 9 Proprotein Convertases Receptors, LDL Sequence Alignment Serine Endopeptidases South Africa || We analysed the Proprotein Convertase Subtilisin Kexin type 9 (PCSK9) exons and intronic junctions of 71 patients with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) in whom LDL receptor (LDLR) or apolipoprotein B100 mutations were excluded. The previously reported S127R and R237W mutations were found in South African families, whereas new missense mutations D129G and A168E were found in families from New Zealand. Only, the S127R and D129G mutations modify a highly conserved residue and segregate with the FH phenotype. We overexpressed those mutants in hepatoma cells and found that both S127R and D129G have reduced autocatalytic activity compared with wild-type PCSK9, whereas the A168E mutant is processed normally. The S127R and D129G mutants were not secreted from cells, unlike the A168E mutant and wild-type PCSK9. By immunoblot, we showed that the expression of the LDLR was reduced by 40% in cells overexpressing wild-type or A168E PCSK9 and further reduced by 30% when the S127R or D129G mutants were used. Paralleling the LDLR levels, LDL cellular binding decreased by 25% upon wild-type PCSK9 or A168E overexpression, and by 45% with both S127R and D129G mutants. Our study therefore indicates that PCSK9 mediated inhibition of the LDLR does not require PCSK9 autocatalytic cleavage or secretion, suggesting that PCSK9 may also function intracellularly.",4
"Temporal repolarization lability in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by beta-myosin heavy-chain gene mutations. || Adult Amino Acid Sequence Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Electrocardiography Electrophysiology Female Heart Rate Humans Male Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Protein Isoforms Reference Values Time Factors || Certain genetic mutations associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) carry an increased risk of sudden death. QT variability identifies patients at a high risk for sudden death from ventricular arrhythmias. We tested whether patients with HCM caused by beta-myosin heavy-chain (beta-MHC) gene mutations exhibit labile ventricular repolarization using beat-to-beat QT variability analysis. We measured the QT variability index and heart rate-QT interval coherence from Holter monitor recordings in 36 patients with HCM caused by known beta-MHC gene mutations and in 26 age- and sex-matched controls. There were 7 distinct beta-MHC gene mutations in these 36 patients; 9 patients had HCM caused by the malignant Arg(403)Gln mutation and 8 patients had HCM caused by the more benign Leu(908)Val mutation. The QT variability index was higher in HCM patients than in controls (-1.24+/-0.17 versus -1. 58+/-0.38, P<0.01), and the greatest abnormality was detected in patients with the Arg(403)Gln mutation (-0.99+/-0.49 versus -1. 46+/-0.43 in controls, P<0.05). In keeping with this finding, coherence was lower for the entire HCM group than for controls (P<0. 001). Coherence was also significantly lower in patients with the Arg(403)Gln mutation compared with controls (P<0.05). These findings suggest that (1) patients with HCM caused by beta-MHC gene mutations exhibit labile repolarization quantified by QT variability analysis and, hence, may be more at risk for sudden death from ventricular arrhythmias, and (2) indices of QT variability may be particularly abnormal in patients with beta-MHC gene mutations that are associated with a poor prognosis.",4
"Disease Progression Modeling to Evaluate the Effects of Enzyme Replacement Therapy on Kidney Function in Adult Patients with the Classic Phenotype of Fabry Disease. || Classic phenotype Enzyme replacement therapy Fabry disease Modeling Nephropathy || Fabry disease (FD) is a rare inherited lysosomal storage disease with common and serious kidney complications. Enzyme replacement therapies (ERT) with agalsidase-α and -β were investigated to characterize their therapeutic effect on kidney function in FD patients with Classic phenotype. The prospective FD cohort consisted of 98 genetically confirmed patients (females, n = 61, males, n = 37). The median [interquartile range] follow-up time (time difference from first to last visit) was 9 [6, 12] years. The median age of ERT start was 36 [21 - 54] years for females and 39 [28 - 49] years for males. A disease progression model was developed to (i) characterize the time course of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and (ii) evaluate therapeutic effects of ERT on kidney function. Change in eGFR over time was best described by the linear model. Females had stable kidney function with and without ERT (eGFR slopes of -0.07 ml/min/1.73m^2 per year and 0.52 ml/min/1.73m^2 per year, respectively). Males with ERT showed an eGFR decrease of -3.07 ml/min/1.73m^2 per year. Mathematical disease progression modeling indicates that there is no clear therapeutic effect of ERT on kidney function in adult patients with Classic Phenotype of FD. Interpretation of these findings should take into account that the study is not randomized and lacks a placebo controlled group. Further investigations are warranted to clarify whether earlier ERT initiation before 18 years of age, higher ERT dose or more intensive therapies can preserve kidney function.",3 4
"HRPT2, encoding parafibromin, is mutated in hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome. || Adenoma Amino Acid Sequence Base Sequence Chromosomes, Human, Pair 1 Exons Expressed Sequence Tags Genes, Tumor Suppressor Genetic Linkage Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Heterozygote Humans Hyperparathyroidism Microsatellite Repeats Molecular Sequence Data Open Reading Frames Parathyroid Neoplasms Pedigree Proteins Syndrome Tumor Suppressor Proteins || We report here the identification of a gene associated with the hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor (HPT-JT) syndrome. A single locus associated with HPT-JT (HRPT2) was previously mapped to chromosomal region 1q25-q32. We refined this region to a critical interval of 12 cM by genotyping in 26 affected kindreds. Using a positional candidate approach, we identified thirteen different heterozygous, germline, inactivating mutations in a single gene in fourteen families with HPT-JT. The proposed role of HRPT2 as a tumor suppressor was supported by mutation screening in 48 parathyroid adenomas with cystic features, which identified three somatic inactivating mutations, all located in exon 1. None of these mutations were detected in normal controls, and all were predicted to cause deficient or impaired protein function. HRPT2 is a ubiquitously expressed, evolutionarily conserved gene encoding a predicted protein of 531 amino acids, for which we propose the name parafibromin. Our findings suggest that HRPT2 is a tumor-suppressor gene, the inactivation of which is directly involved in predisposition to HPT-JT and in development of some sporadic parathyroid tumors.",4
"Newborn screening for six lysosomal storage disorders in a cohort of Mexican patients: Three-year findings from a screening program in a closed Mexican health system. || Dried Blood Spot Testing Female Genotype Humans Infant, Newborn Lysosomal Storage Diseases Male Mexico Neonatal Screening Sensitivity and Specificity Tandem Mass Spectrometry || To evaluate the results of a lysosomal newborn screening (NBS) program in a cohort of 20,018 Mexican patients over the course of 3years in a closed Mexican Health System (Petróleos Mexicanos [PEMEX] Health Services). Using dried blood spots (DBS), we performed a multiplex tandem mass spectrometry enzymatic assay for six lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs) including Pompe disease, Fabry disease, Gaucher disease, mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS-I), Niemann-Pick type A/B, and Krabbe disease. Screen-positive cases were confirmed using leukocyte enzymatic activity and DNA molecular analysis. From July 2012 to April 2016, 20,018 patients were screened; 20 patients were confirmed to have an LSD phenotype (99.9 in 100,000 newborns). Final distributions include 11 Pompe disease, five Fabry disease, two MPS-I, and two Niemann-Pick type A/B patients. We did not find any Gaucher or Krabbe patients. A final frequency of 1 in 1001 LSD newborn phenotypes was established. NBS is a major public health achievement that has decreased the morbidity and mortality of inborn errors of metabolism. The introduction of NBS for LSD presents new challenges. This is the first multiplex Latin-American study of six LSDs detected through NBS.",3 4
"Myocardial fibrosis as the first sign of cardiac involvement in a male patient with Fabry disease: report of a clinical case and discussion on the utility of the magnetic resonance in Fabry pathology. || Contrast Media DNA Mutational Analysis Fabry Disease Fibrosis Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Humans Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Cine Male Mutation Myocardium Phenotype Predictive Value of Tests Sex Factors Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) with late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) imaging is increasingly used to assess myocardial involvement in patients with Fabry disease, an X linked lipid storage disorder. However, it is often proposed as an optional tool. A different cardiomyopathic disease progression between male and female patients was hypothesised in previous studies, as in female myocardial fibrosis was found without left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy, while myocardial fibrosis was always detected in association to LV hypertrophy in men. A male Caucasian patient, 19 years old, diagnosed through a family-based molecular screening, presented with LGE of the LV inferolateral wall evidenced at the CMR, without LV hypertrophy, or other clinical signs of the disease. This is the first report of cardiac fibrosis as the first sign of organ involvement in a male patient with Fabry disease. This finding stresses the importance of performing CMR with LGE imaging for the initial staging and monitoring of Fabry patients of both genders.",4
"Recurrent somatic JAK-STAT pathway variants within a RUNX1-mutated pedigree. || Adult Child Codon, Nonsense Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit Female Germ-Line Mutation Humans Janus Kinase 2 Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Acute Male Pedigree Proteins Signal Transduction || Germline variants within the transcription factor RUNX1 are associated with familial platelet disorder and acute leukemia in over 40% of carriers. At present, the somatic events triggering leukemic transformation appear heterogeneous and profiles of leukemia initiation across family members are poorly defined. We report a new RUNX1 family where three sisters harboring a germline nonsense RUNX1 variant, c.601C>T (p.(Arg201*)), developed acute myelomonocytic leukemia (AML) at 5 years of age. Whole-exome sequencing of tumor samples revealed all three siblings independently acquired variants within the JAK-STAT pathway, specifically targeting JAK2 and SH2B3 (a negative regulator of JAK2), while also sharing the 46/1 haplotype linked with sporadic JAK2-positive myeloproliferative neoplasms. In-depth chromosomal characterization of tumors revealed acquired copy number gains and uniparental disomy amplifying RUNX1, JAK2 and SH2B3 variants, highlighting the significance of co-operation between these disrupted pathways. One sibling, presenting with myelodysplasia at 14 years, had no evidence of clonal or subclonal JAK2 or SH2B3 variants, suggesting the latter were specifically associated with leukemic transformation in her sisters. Collectively, the clinical and molecular homogeneity across these three young siblings provides the first notable example of convergent AML evolution in a RUNX1 pedigree, with the recurrent acquisition of JAK-STAT pathway variants giving rise to high-risk AML, characterized by chemotherapy resistance and relapse.",2 4
"Rare Variants in the Epithelial Cadherin Gene Underlying the Genetic Etiology of Nonsyndromic Cleft Lip with or without Cleft Palate. || Alleles Amino Acid Substitution Animals Antigens, CD Brain Cadherins Cell Line Cleft Lip Cleft Palate DNA Mutational Analysis Genetic Variation Genotype Germ-Line Mutation Humans Mutation Open Reading Frames Penetrance || Nonsyndromic orofacial cleft (NSOFC) is a complex disease of still unclear genetic etiology. To investigate the contribution of rare epithelial cadherin (CDH1) gene variants to NSOFC, we target sequenced 221 probands. Candidate variants were evaluated via in vitro, in silico, or segregation analyses. Three probably pathogenic variants (c.760G>A [p.Asp254Asn], c.1023T>G [p.Tyr341*], and c.2351G>A [p.Arg784His]) segregated according to autosomal dominant inheritance in four nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (NSCL/P) families (Lod score: 5.8 at θ = 0; 47% penetrance). A fourth possibly pathogenic variant (c.387+5G>A) was also found, but further functional analyses are needed (overall prevalence of CDH1 candidate variants: 2%; 15.4% among familial cases). CDH1 mutational burden was higher among probands from familial cases when compared to that of controls (P = 0.002). We concluded that CDH1 contributes to NSCL/P with mainly rare, moderately penetrant variants, and CDH1 haploinsufficiency is the likely etiological mechanism.",4
"Distinguishing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-associated mutations from background genetic noise. || Adolescent Adult Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Female Genetic Testing Genomics Humans Male Middle Aged Polymorphism, Genetic Sarcomeres Sequence Analysis, DNA Young Adult || Despite the significant progress that has been made in identifying disease-associated mutations, the utility of the hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) genetic test is limited by a lack of understanding of the background genetic variation inherent to these sarcomeric genes in seemingly healthy subjects. This study represents the first comprehensive analysis of genetic variation in 427 ostensibly healthy individuals for the HCM genetic test using the ""gold standard"" Sanger sequencing method validating the background rate identified in the publically available exomes. While mutations are clearly overrepresented in disease, a background rate as high as ∼5 % among healthy individuals prevents diagnostic certainty. To this end, we have identified a number of estimated predictive value-based associations including gene-specific, topology, and conservation methods generating an algorithm aiding in the probabilistic interpretation of an HCM genetic test.",4
"Genotype: A Crucial but Not Unique Factor Affecting the Clinical Phenotypes in Fabry Disease. || Adult Asian Continental Ancestry Group China Codon, Nonsense Fabry Disease Female Frameshift Mutation Genetic Association Studies Genotype Humans Male Mutation Mutation, Missense Phenotype Sequence Analysis, DNA Young Adult alpha-Galactosidase || Numerous α-galactosidase A (α-gal A) gene (GLA) mutations have been identified in Fabry disease (FD), but studies on genotype-phenotype correlation are limited. This study evaluated the features of GLA gene mutations and genotype-phenotype relationship in Chinese FD patients. Gene sequencing results, demographic information, clinical history, and laboratory findings were collected from 73 Chinese FD patients. Totally 47 mutations were identified, including 23 novel mutations which might be pathogenic. For male patients, those with frameshift and nonsense mutations presented the classical FD, whereas those with missense mutations presented both of classical and atypical phenotypes. Interestingly, two male patients with missense mutation p.R356G from two unrelated families, and two with p.R301Q from one family presented different phenotypes. A statistically significant association was found between the levels of α-gal A enzyme activity and ocular changes in males, though no significant association was found between residual enzyme activity level and genotype or clinical phenotypes. For female patients, six out of seven with frameshift mutations and one out of nine with missense mutation presented the classical FD, and α-gal A activity in those patients was found to be significantly lower than that of patients with atypical phenotypes (13.73 vs. 46.32 nmol/ml/h/mg). Our findings suggest that the α-gal A activity might be associated with the clinical severity in female patients with FD. But no obvious associations between activity level of α-gal A and genotype or clinical phenotypes were found for male patients.",3 4
"Clinical features of patients with GJB2 (connexin 26) mutations: severity of hearing loss is correlated with genotypes and protein expression patterns. || Adolescent Adult Case-Control Studies Child Child, Preschool Connexin 26 Connexins DNA Mutational Analysis Female Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genotype Hearing Loss Humans Infant Infant, Newborn Male Middle Aged Phenotype Prognosis Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Severity of Illness Index || Mutations in the GJB2 (connexin 26, Cx26) gene are the major cause of nonsyndromic hearing impairment in many populations. Genetic testing offers opportunities to determine the cause of deafness and predict the course of hearing, enabling the prognostication of language development. In the current study, we compared severity of hearing impairment in 60 patients associated with biallelic GJB2 mutations and assessed the correlation of genotypes and phenotypes. Within a spectrum of GJB2 mutations found in the Japanese population, the phenotype of the most prevalent mutation, 235delC, was found to show more severe hearing impairment than that of V37I, which is the second most frequent mutation. The results of the present study, taken together with phenotypes caused by other types of mutations, support the general rule that phenotypes caused by the truncating GJB2 mutations are more severe than those caused by missense mutations. The present in vitro study further confirmed that differences in phenotypes could be explained by the protein expression pattern.",1 4
"Evaluation of germline PTEN mutations in endometrial cancer patients. || Cohort Studies Endometrial Neoplasms Female Gene Deletion Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Middle Aged PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Retrospective Studies Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Cowden Syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by multiple hamartomas, increased risks of breast and thyroid cancers, and possibly endometrial carcinoma. Susceptibility to Cowden syndrome is conferred by germline mutation of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene, and somatic mutations of PTEN are common in sporadic endometrial carcinomas. The aim of this study was to test whether a substantial proportion of endometrial cancers are associated with germline mutations of the PTEN gene, not necessarily in association with clinically overt Cowden syndrome. A retrospective cohort of 240 consecutive patients with pathologically confirmed endometrial carcinoma diagnosed at our institution from 1999 to 2002 was ascertained for study. Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood lymphocytes and the entire PTEN coding region and exon-intron junctions were screened for mutations by single strand conformation polymorphism analysis. Potential variants were subjected to direct sequence analysis. No clearly deleterious PTEN sequence variant was identified in this screened cohort of endometrial cancer patients. One patient harbored a 5-bp deletion in the intronic region adjacent to the splice acceptor site of PTEN exon 4, but this variant has been previously classified as a rare polymorphism. Although these data do not preclude the possibility of an increased risk of endometrial cancer in association with the Cowden syndrome, they indicate that germline PTEN mutations do not account for a significant proportion of genetic attributable risk for endometrial carcinoma.",4
"Association of Rare and Common Variation in the Lipoprotein Lipase Gene With Coronary Artery Disease. || Adult Age of Onset Case-Control Studies Coronary Artery Disease Cross-Sectional Studies Female Genotype Heterozygote Humans Lipoprotein Lipase Lipoproteins Male Middle Aged Mutation Odds Ratio Triglycerides || The activity of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) is the rate-determining step in clearing triglyceride-rich lipoproteins from the circulation. Mutations that damage the LPL gene (LPL) lead to lifelong deficiency in enzymatic activity and can provide insight into the relationship of LPL to human disease. To determine whether rare and/or common variants in LPL are associated with early-onset coronary artery disease (CAD). In a cross-sectional study, LPL was sequenced in 10 CAD case-control cohorts of the multinational Myocardial Infarction Genetics Consortium and a nested CAD case-control cohort of the Geisinger Health System DiscovEHR cohort between 2010 and 2015. Common variants were genotyped in up to 305 699 individuals of the Global Lipids Genetics Consortium and up to 120 600 individuals of the CARDIoGRAM Exome Consortium between 2012 and 2014. Study-specific estimates were pooled via meta-analysis. Rare damaging mutations in LPL included loss-of-function variants and missense variants annotated as pathogenic in a human genetics database or predicted to be damaging by computer prediction algorithms trained to identify mutations that impair protein function. Common variants in the LPL gene region included those independently associated with circulating triglyceride levels. Circulating lipid levels and CAD. Among 46 891 individuals with LPL gene sequencing data available, the mean (SD) age was 50 (12.6) years and 51% were female. A total of 188 participants (0.40%; 95% CI, 0.35%-0.46%) carried a damaging mutation in LPL, including 105 of 32 646 control participants (0.32%) and 83 of 14 245 participants with early-onset CAD (0.58%). Compared with 46 703 noncarriers, the 188 heterozygous carriers of an LPL damaging mutation displayed higher plasma triglyceride levels (19.6 mg/dL; 95% CI, 4.6-34.6 mg/dL) and higher odds of CAD (odds ratio = 1.84; 95% CI, 1.35-2.51; P < .001). An analysis of 6 common LPL variants resulted in an odds ratio for CAD of 1.51 (95% CI, 1.39-1.64; P = 1.1 × 10-22) per 1-SD increase in triglycerides. The presence of rare damaging mutations in LPL was significantly associated with higher triglyceride levels and presence of coronary artery disease. However, further research is needed to assess whether there are causal mechanisms by which heterozygous lipoprotein lipase deficiency could lead to coronary artery disease.",4
"Fabry disease: 20 novel GLA mutations in 35 families. ||  || Thirty two mutations have been found in 35 unrelated patients of European origin with Fabry disease, including 8 females. Twenty of the mutations are novel and comprise of 13 missense: H46Y, W47G, R49P, C94S, F113S, G258R, P259R, Q279H, Q280H, R363H, A377D, P409A, P409T; 1 nonsense: L294X; 5 small deletions: 154delT, 520delT, 909-918del10, 1152-1153delCA, 1235-1236delCT and 1 splice site mutation: IVS5+2t-->c. The remaining 12 mutations have all been reported previously. All patients with deletions had the classic form of the disease but it was not possible to predict the phenotype from the missense mutations.",3 4
"Resequencing the whole MYH7 gene (including the intronic, promoter, and 3' UTR sequences) in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || 3' Untranslated Regions Adult Alleles Cardiac Myosins Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Exons Female Gene Frequency Genotype Humans Introns Male Middle Aged Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Promoter Regions, Genetic Sequence Analysis, DNA || MYH7 mutations are found in ~20% of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) patients. Currently, mutational analysis is based on the sequencing of the coding exons and a few exon-flanking intronic nucleotides, resulting in omission of single-exon deletions and mutations in internal intronic, promoter, and 3' UTR regions. We amplified and sequenced large MYH7 fragments in 60 HCM patients without previously identified sarcomere mutations. Lack of aberrant PCR fragments excluded single-exon deletions in the patients. Instead, we identified several new rare intronic variants. An intron 26 single nucleotide insertion (-5 insC) was predicted to affect pre-mRNA splicing, but allele frequencies did not differ between patients and controls (n = 150). We found several rare promoter variants in the patients compared to controls, some of which were in binding sites for transcription factors and could thus affect gene expression. Only one rare 3' UTR variant (c.*29T>C) found in the patients was absent among the controls. This nucleotide change would not affect the binding of known microRNAs. Therefore, MYH7 mutations outside the coding exon sequences would be rarely found among HCM patients. However, changes in the promoter region could be linked to the risk of developing HCM. Further research to define the functional effect of these variants on gene expression is necessary to confirm the role of the MYH7 promoter in cardiac hypertrophy.",4
"Cardiac response to enzyme replacement therapy in infantile Pompe disease with severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. || Acarbose Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Echocardiography Echocardiography, Doppler Enzyme Replacement Therapy Female Glucosidases Glycogen Storage Disease Type II Glycoside Hydrolase Inhibitors Humans Infant Treatment Outcome || Classic infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD), characterized by predominantly cardiac involvement, used to be considered uniformly lethal within months. The availability of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has transformed the course of the disease. Decrease in ventricular hypertrophy and improvement in ventricular function have been suggested as proof for efficacy. We report the cardiac response to ERT of a child with IOPD and severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The myocardial hypertrophy resolved. Change in ejection fraction, however, was slow. We discuss the potential benefit of other parameters beyond ejection to assess cardiac function in IOPD, including speckle tracking-based strain.",3 4
"Frequency of Germline Mutations in 25 Cancer Susceptibility Genes in a Sequential Series of Patients With Breast Cancer. || Adult Age Factors Aged Aged, 80 and over Breast Neoplasms Female Gene Expression Profiling Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic Genes, BRCA1 Genes, BRCA2 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Genetic Testing Germ-Line Mutation High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Jews Middle Aged Neoplasm Staging Ovarian Neoplasms Predictive Value of Tests Prevalence Prospective Studies Retrospective Studies Risk Factors Triple Negative Breast Neoplasms || Testing for germline mutations in BRCA1/2 is standard for select patients with breast cancer to guide clinical management. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) allows testing for mutations in additional breast cancer predisposition genes. The frequency of germline mutations detected by using NGS has been reported in patients with breast cancer who were referred for BRCA1/2 testing or with triple-negative breast cancer. We assessed the frequency and predictors of mutations in 25 cancer predisposition genes, including BRCA1/2, in a sequential series of patients with breast cancer at an academic institution to examine the utility of genetic testing in this population. Patients with stages I to III breast cancer who were seen at a single cancer center between 2010 and 2012, and who agreed to participate in research DNA banking, were included (N = 488). Personal and family cancer histories were collected and germline DNA was sequenced with NGS to identify mutations. Deleterious mutations were identified in 10.7% of women, including 6.1% in BRCA1/2 (5.1% in non-Ashkenazi Jewish patients) and 4.6% in other breast/ovarian cancer predisposition genes including CHEK2 (n = 10), ATM (n = 4), BRIP1 (n = 4), and one each in PALB2, PTEN, NBN, RAD51C, RAD51D, MSH6, and PMS2. Whereas young age (P < .01), Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry (P < .01), triple-negative breast cancer (P = .01), and family history of breast/ovarian cancer (P = .01) predicted for BRCA1/2 mutations, no factors predicted for mutations in other breast cancer predisposition genes. Among sequential patients with breast cancer, 10.7% were found to have a germline mutation in a gene that predisposes women to breast or ovarian cancer, using a panel of 25 predisposition genes. Factors that predict for BRCA1/2 mutations do not predict for mutations in other breast/ovarian cancer susceptibility genes when these genes are analyzed as a single group. Additional cohorts will be helpful to define individuals at higher risk of carrying mutations in genes other than BRCA1/2.",4
"Complete exon sequencing of all known Usher syndrome genes greatly improves molecular diagnosis. || Amino Acid Sequence Case-Control Studies Exons France Genome, Human Genomics Genotype Humans Molecular Sequence Data Mutation Pedigree Usher Syndromes || Usher syndrome (USH) combines sensorineural deafness with blindness. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive mode. Early diagnosis is critical for adapted educational and patient management choices, and for genetic counseling. To date, nine causative genes have been identified for the three clinical subtypes (USH1, USH2 and USH3). Current diagnostic strategies make use of a genotyping microarray that is based on the previously reported mutations. The purpose of this study was to design a more accurate molecular diagnosis tool. We sequenced the 366 coding exons and flanking regions of the nine known USH genes, in 54 USH patients (27 USH1, 21 USH2 and 6 USH3). Biallelic mutations were detected in 39 patients (72%) and monoallelic mutations in an additional 10 patients (18.5%). In addition to biallelic mutations in one of the USH genes, presumably pathogenic mutations in another USH gene were detected in seven patients (13%), and another patient carried monoallelic mutations in three different USH genes. Notably, none of the USH3 patients carried detectable mutations in the only known USH3 gene, whereas they all carried mutations in USH2 genes. Most importantly, the currently used microarray would have detected only 30 of the 81 different mutations that we found, of which 39 (48%) were novel. Based on these results, complete exon sequencing of the currently known USH genes stands as a definite improvement for molecular diagnosis of this disease, which is of utmost importance in the perspective of gene therapy.",4
"Abnormal cardiac formation in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: fractal analysis of trabeculae and preclinical gene expression. || Adolescent Adult Aged Aged, 80 and over Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Female Fractals Gene Expression Heart Ventricles Humans Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Cine Male Middle Aged Radiography Sarcomeres Young Adult || Mutations in genes coding for sarcomeric proteins cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Subtle abnormalities of the myocardium may be present in mutation carriers without left ventricular hypertrophy (G+LVH-) but are difficult to quantify. Fractal analysis has been used to define trabeculae in left ventricular noncompaction and to identify normal racial variations. We hypothesized that trabeculae measured by fractal analysis of cardiovascular magnetic resonance images are abnormal in G+LVH- patients, providing a preclinical marker of disease in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance was performed on 40 G+LVH- patients (33±15 years, 38% men), 67 patients with a clinical diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (53±15 years, 76% men; 31 with a pathogenic mutation [G+LVH+]), and 69 matched healthy volunteers (44±15 years, 57% men). Trabeculae were quantified by fractal analysis of cine slices to calculate the fractal dimension, a unitless index of endocardial complexity calculated from endocardial contours after segmentation. In G+LVH- patients, apical left ventricular trabeculation was increased compared with controls (maximal apical fractal dimension, 1.249±0.07 versus 1.199±0.05; P=0.001). In G+LVH+ and G-LVH+ cohorts, maximal apical fractal dimension was greater than in controls (P<0.0001) irrespective of gene status (G+LVH+: 1.370±0.08; G-LVH+: 1.380±0.09). Compared with controls, G+LVH- patients also had a higher frequency of clefts (28% versus 8%; P=0.02), longer anterior mitral valve leaflets (23.5±3.0 versus 19.7±3.1 mm; P<0.0001), greater septal systolic wall thickness (12.6±3.2 versus 11.2±2.1 mm; P=0.03), higher ejection fraction (71±4% versus 69±4%; P=0.03), and smaller end-systolic volumes (38±9 versus 43±12 mL; P=0.03). Increased myocardial trabecular complexity is one of several preclinical abnormalities in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy sarcomere gene mutation carriers without LVH.",4
"Novel mutations of the GLA gene in Japanese patients with Fabry disease and their functional characterization by active site specific chaperone. ||  || Fabry disease is an X-linked recessive inborn metabolic disorder caused by a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A (EC 3.2.1.22). The causative mutations are diverse, include both large rearrangements and single-base substitutions, and are dispersed throughout the 7 exons of the alpha-galactosidase A gene (GLA). Mutation hotspots for Fabry disease do not exist. We examined 62 Fabry patients in Japan and found 24 GLA mutations, including 11 novel ones. A potential treatment reported for Fabry disease is active site specific chaperone (ASSC) therapy using 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin (DGJ), an inhibitor of alpha-galactosidase A, at subinhibitory concentrations. We transfected COS-7 cells with the 24 mutant GLAs and analyzed the alpha-galactosidase A activities. We then treated the transfected COS-7 cells with DGJ and analyzed its effect on the mutant enzyme activities. The activity of 11 missense mutants increased significantly with DGJ. Although ASSC therapy is useful only for misfolding mutants and therefore not applicable to all cases, it may be useful for treating many Japanese patients with Fabry disease.",4 0
"Dominant-negative ALK2 allele associates with congenital heart defects. || Activin Receptors, Type I Alleles Amino Acid Substitution Animals COS Cells Cattle Cercopithecus aethiops Female Genes, Dominant Heart Heart Septal Defects Humans Male Mutation, Missense Myocardium Netherlands Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide Zebrafish || Serious congenital heart defects occur as a result of improper atrioventricular septum (AVS) development during embryogenesis. Despite extensive knowledge of the genetic control of AVS development, few genetic lesions have been identified that are responsible for AVS-associated congenital heart defects. We sequenced 32 genes known to be important in AVS development in patients with AVS defects and identified 11 novel coding single-nucleotide polymorphisms that are predicted to impair protein function. We focused on variants identified in the bone morphogenetic protein receptor, ALK2, and subjected 2 identified variants to functional analysis. The coding single-nucleotide polymorphisms R307L and L343P are heterozygous missense substitutions and were each identified in single individuals. The L343P allele had impaired functional activity as measured by in vitro kinase and bone morphogenetic protein-specific transcriptional response assays and dominant-interfering activity in vivo. In vivo analysis of zebrafish embryos injected with ALK2 L343P RNA revealed improper atrioventricular canal formation. These data identify the dominant-negative allele ALK2 L343P in a patient with AVS defects.",4
"A myosin missense mutation, not a null allele, causes familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. ||  || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterized by myocardial hypertrophy of unknown etiology. Missense mutations of the cardiac beta-myosin-heavy-chain (beta-MHC) gene that may be responsible for cardiac hypertrophy have been detected in patients with HCM. On the other hand, gross structural abnormalities in the cardiac beta-MHC gene, ie, an alpha/beta hybrid gene and partial deletion of the gene, have also been reported. The direct correlation between gross abnormalities and development of HCM is not well understood. We analyzed the structure of the cardiac beta-MHC gene from patients with HCM by using polymerase chain reaction-DNA conformation polymorphism analysis and found two sequence variations in exons 3 and 22 in one patient. These sequence variations at codon 54 (exon 3; nonsense mutation) and codon 870 (exon 22; Arg-to-His mutation) were identified by direct sequencing and dot-blot hybridization with allele-specific oligonucleotide probes. Relatives of this patient were examined for the mutations. It was revealed that the missense mutation was inherited from the affected father and the nonsense mutation from the unaffected grandmother through the unaffected mother. In addition, the missense mutation was also found in seven other patients from two other unrelated multiplex HCM families. The Arg870His mutation was suggested to cause HCM. In contrast, the gene with the nonsense mutation would encode for a cardiac beta-MHC protein of only 53 amino acid residues, which may be too short to be incorporated into the thick filament assembly of cardiac myosin chains and showed no dominant phenotype of heart disease. This is the first report of a nonsense mutation in the human cardiac beta-MHC gene.",2 4
"Immune dysregulation in patients with PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome: Analysis of FOXP3 regulatory T cells. || Adolescent Adult Aged Autoimmunity B-Lymphocytes Cells, Cultured Child Forkhead Transcription Factors Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Hyperplasia Immunological Synapses Lymphocyte Subsets Male Membrane Potential, Mitochondrial Middle Aged Mutation Nuclear Proteins PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phosphoprotein Phosphatases Protein Binding Protein Transport Signal Transduction T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory Young Adult || Patients with heterozygous germline mutations in phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) experience autoimmunity and lymphoid hyperplasia. Because regulation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway is critical for maintaining regulatory T (Treg) cell functions, we investigate Treg cells in patients with heterozygous germline PTEN mutations (PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome [PHTS]). Patients with PHTS were assessed for immunologic conditions, lymphocyte subsets, forkhead box P3 (FOXP3)+ Treg cell levels, and phenotype. To determine the functional importance of phosphatases that control the PI3K pathway, we assessed Treg cell induction in vitro, mitochondrial depolarization, and recruitment of PTEN to the immunologic synapse. Autoimmunity and peripheral lymphoid hyperplasia were found in 43% of 79 patients with PHTS. Immune dysregulation in patients with PHTS included lymphopenia, CD4+ T-cell reduction, and changes in T- and B-cell subsets. Although total CD4+FOXP3+ Treg cell numbers are reduced, frequencies are maintained in the blood and intestine. Despite pathogenic PTEN mutations, the FOXP3+ T cells are phenotypically normal. We show that the phosphatase PH domain leucine-rich repeat protein phosphatase (PHLPP) downstream of PTEN is highly expressed in normal human Treg cells and provides complementary phosphatase activity. PHLPP is indispensable for the differentiation of induced Treg cells in vitro and Treg cell mitochondrial fitness. PTEN and PHLPP form a phosphatase network that is polarized at the immunologic synapse. Heterozygous loss of function of PTEN in human subjects has a significant effect on T- and B-cell immunity. Assembly of the PTEN-PHLPP phosphatase network allows coordinated phosphatase activities at the site of T-cell receptor activation, which is important for limiting PI3K hyperactivation in Treg cells despite PTEN haploinsufficiency.",3 4
"Screening Mutations of MYBPC3 in 114 Unrelated Patients with Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy by Targeted Capture and Next-generation Sequencing. || Adult Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Carrier Proteins DNA Mutational Analysis Echocardiography Female Gene Order Genetic Association Studies Genotype Heart Atria Heart Ventricles High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Male Middle Aged Mutation Phenotype || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a major cause of sudden cardiac death. Mutations in the MYBPC3 gene represent the cause of HCM in ~35% of patients with HCM. However, genetic testing in clinic setting has been limited due to the cost and relatively time-consuming by Sanger sequencing. Here, we developed a HCM Molecular Diagnostic Kit enabling ultra-low-cost targeted gene resequencing in a large cohort and investigated the mutation spectrum of MYBPC3. In a cohort of 114 patients with HCM, a total of 20 different mutations (8 novel and 12 known mutations) of MYBPC3 were identified from 25 patients (21.9%). We demonstrated that the power of targeted resequencing in a cohort of HCM patients, and found that MYBPC3 is a common HCM-causing gene in Chinese patients. Phenotype-genotype analyses showed that the patients with double mutations (n = 2) or premature termination codon mutations (n = 12) showed more severe manifestations, compared with patients with missense mutations (n = 11). Particularly, we identified a recurrent truncation mutation (p.Y842X) in four unrelated cases (4/25, 16%), who showed severe phenotypes, and suggest that the p.Y842X is a frequent mutation in Chinese HCM patients with severe phenotypes.",4
"Prevalence of mutations in a panel of breast cancer susceptibility genes in BRCA1/2-negative patients with early-onset breast cancer. || Adult Breast Neoplasms Female Genes, BRCA1 Genes, BRCA2 Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing Humans Penetrance Prevalence Risk Factors || Clinical testing for germ-line variation in multiple cancer susceptibility genes is available using massively parallel sequencing. Limited information is available for pretest genetic counseling regarding the spectrum of mutations and variants of uncertain significance in defined patient populations. We performed massively parallel sequencing using targeted capture of 22 cancer susceptibility genes in 278 BRCA1/2-negative patients with early-onset breast cancer (diagnosed at younger than 40 years of age). Thirty-one patients (11%) were found to have at least one deleterious or likely deleterious variant. Seven patients (2.5% overall) were found to have deleterious or likely deleterious variants in genes for which clinical guidelines exist for management, namely TP53 (4), CDKN2A (1), MSH2 (1), and MUTYH (double heterozygote). Twenty-four patients (8.6%) had deleterious or likely deleterious variants in a cancer susceptibility gene for which clinical guidelines are lacking, such as CHEK2 and ATM. Fifty-four patients (19%) had at least one variant of uncertain significance, and six patients were heterozygous for a variant in MUTYH. These data demonstrate that massively parallel sequencing identifies reportable variants in known cancer susceptibility genes in more than 30% of patients with early-onset breast cancer. However, only few patients (2.5%) have definitively actionable mutations given current clinical management guidelines.Genet Med 17 8, 630-638.",3 4
"Apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy due to a de novo mutation Arg719Trp of the beta-myosin heavy chain gene and cardiac arrest in childhood. A case report and family study. || Arginine Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic Child Codon Death, Sudden, Cardiac Echocardiography Electrocardiography Electrophysiology Humans Male Mutation Myosin Heavy Chains Pedigree Phenotype Tryptophan || Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a myocardial disease with variable phenotpye and genotype. To demonstrate that the mutation Arg719Trp in the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain (beta MHC) gene is a high risk factor for sudden death and can be associated with an unusual apical non-obstructive HCM, we report the case of a 6 1/2 year old boy, who suffered cardiac arrest. The proband had a de novo mutation of the beta MHC gene (Arg719Trp) on the paternal beta MHC allele and a second maternally transmitted mutation (Met349Thr), as was shown previously (Jeschke et al. 1998 (11)). Here we report the clinical phenotype of the proband and of his relatives in detail. The proband had a marked apical and midventricular hypertrophy of the left and right ventricle without obstruction. There was an abnormal relaxation of both ventricles. Holter monitoring detected no arrhythmia. Ventricular fibrillation was inducible only by aggressive programmed stimulation. The boy died 3 1/2 years later after another cardiac arrest due to arrhythmia. Five carriers of the Met349Thr mutation in the family were asymptomatic and had no echocardiographic changes in the heart, suggesting a neutral inherited polymorphism or a recessive mutation. It is concluded that there is an association of the mutation Arg719Trp in the beta-myosin heavy chain with sudden cardiac death in a young child. Disease history in conjunction with the genetic analysis suggests that the implantation of a defibrillator converter would have been a beneficial and probably life saving measure.",4
"Germline E-cadherin gene (CDH1) mutations predispose to familial gastric cancer and colorectal cancer. || Adult Aged Base Sequence Cadherins Colorectal Neoplasms DNA Mutational Analysis DNA, Neoplasm Exons Family Health Female Gene Deletion Genetic Markers Genetic Predisposition to Disease Germ-Line Mutation Humans Loss of Heterozygosity Male Middle Aged Pedigree Point Mutation Polymerase Chain Reaction Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational Stomach Neoplasms || Inherited mutations in the E-cadherin gene ( CDH1 ) were described recently in three Maori kindreds with familial gastric cancer. Familial gastric cancer is genetically heterogeneous and it is not clear what proportion of gastric cancer susceptibility in non-Maori populations is due to germline CDH1 mutations. Therefore, we screened eight familial gastric cancer kindreds of British and Irish origin for germline CDH1 mutations, by SSCP analysis of all 16 exons and flanking sequences. Each family contained: (i) two cases of gastric cancer in first degree relatives with one affected before age 50 years; or (ii) three or more cases of gastric cancer. Novel germline CDH1 mutations (a nonsense and a splice site) were detected in two families (25%). Both mutations were predicted to truncate the E-cadherin protein in the signal peptide domain. In one family there was evidence of non-penetrance and susceptibility to both gastric and colorectal cancer; thus, in addition to six cases of gastric cancer, a CDH1 mutation carrier developed colorectal cancer at age 30 years. We have confirmed that germline mutations in the CDH1 gene cause familial gastric cancer in non-Maori populations. However, only a minority of familial gastric cancers can be accounted for by CDH1 mutations. Loss of E-cadherin function has been implicated in the pathogenesis of sporadic colorectal and other cancers, and our findings provide evidence that germline CDH1 mutations predispose to early onset colorectal cancer. Thus, CDH1 should be investigated as a cause of inherited susceptibility to both gastric and colorectal cancers.",4
"Homozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia in Spain: Prevalence and Phenotype-Genotype Relationship. || Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing Adolescent Adult Apolipoprotein B-100 Cardiovascular Diseases Cholesterol, LDL Female Genetic Markers Genetic Predisposition to Disease Heterozygote Homozygote Humans Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II Male Middle Aged Molecular Epidemiology Mutation Phenotype Prevalence Proprotein Convertase 9 Receptors, LDL Registries Risk Factors Spain Young Adult || Homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HoFH) is a rare disease characterized by elevated plasma levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and extremely high risk of premature atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. HoFH is caused by mutations in several genes, including LDL receptor (LDLR), apolipoprotein B (APOB), proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9), and LDL protein receptor adaptor 1 (LDLRAP1). No epidemiological studies have assessed HoFH prevalence or the clinical and molecular characteristics of this condition. Here, we aimed to characterize HoFH in Spain. Data were collected from the Spanish Dyslipidemia Registry of the Spanish Atherosclerosis Society and from all molecular diagnoses performed for familial hypercholesterolemia in Spain between 1996 and 2015 (n=16 751). Clinical data included baseline lipid levels and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease events. A total of 97 subjects were identified as having HoFH-of whom, 47 were true homozygous (1 for APOB, 5 for LDLRAP1, and 41 for LDLR), 45 compound heterozygous for LDLR, 3 double heterozygous for LDLR and PSCK9, and 2 double heterozygous for LDLR and APOB. No PSCK9 homozygous cases were identified. Two variants in LDLR were identified in 4.8% of the molecular studies. Over 50% of patients did not meet the classical HoFH diagnosis criteria. The estimated HoFH prevalence was 1:450 000. Compared with compound heterozygous cases, true homozygous cases showed more aggressive phenotypes with higher LDL-C and more atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease events. HoFH frequency in Spain was higher than expected. Clinical criteria would underestimate the actual prevalence of individuals with genetic HoFH, highlighting the importance of genetic analysis to improve familial hypercholesterolemia diagnosis accuracy.",3 4
"A previously undescribed mutation within the tetramerisation domain of TP53 in a family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. || Adult Alleles Base Sequence Codon Female Genes, p53 Genotype Humans Karyotyping Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Male Molecular Sequence Data Pedigree Point Mutation Sequence Analysis, DNA || We report details of a family with classic Li-Fraumeni syndrome in which there is a mutation in codon 344 of the tumour suppressor gene TP53. Codon 344 is a key residue within the tetramerisation domain, and the amino acid substitution of a proline for a leucine is predicted to have profound implications for tetramerisation and potentially DNA binding. This is the first report of a mutation at this residue in either sporadic tumours or in the germline and the first report of a germline mutation within the tetramerisation domain. The family does not appear to be remarkable in the spectrum of tumours, and there is loss of the wild-type allele in a leiomyosarcoma from the proband. A cell line has been established from the tumour of the proband and cytogenetic and molecular studies carried out, providing an extensive analysis in this family.",3 4
"Detection of novel germline mutations in six breast cancer predisposition genes by targeted next-generation sequencing. ||  || In this study, a customized amplicon-based target sequencing panel was designed to enrich the whole exon regions of six genes associated with the risk of breast cancer. Targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed for 146 breast cancer patients (BC), 71 healthy women with a family history of breast cancer (high risk), and 55 healthy women without a family history of cancer (control). Sixteen possible disease-causing mutations on four genes were identified in 20 samples. The percentages of possible disease-causing mutation carriers in the BC group (8.9%) and in the high-risk group (8.5%) were higher than that in the control group (1.8%). The BRCA1 possible disease-causing mutation group had a higher prevalence in family history and triple-negative breast cancer, while the BRCA2 possible disease-causing mutation group was younger and more likely to develop axillary lymph node metastasis (P < 0.05). Among the 146 patients, 47 with a family history of breast cancer were also sequenced with another 14 moderate-risk genes. Three additional possible disease-causing mutations were found on PALB2, CHEK2, and PMS2 genes, respectively. The results demonstrate that the six-gene targeted NGS panel may provide an approach to assess the genetic risk of breast cancer and predict the clinical prognosis of breast cancer patients.",4
"Novel PTEN mutations in patients with Cowden disease: absence of clear genotype-phenotype correlations. || Female Genotype Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple Humans Male PTEN Phosphohydrolase Phenotype Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases Tumor Suppressor Proteins || Cowden disease (CD) is characterised by multiple hamartomas in a variety of tissues. The pathological hallmark is the presence of a number of trichilemmomas. Several neurological symptoms are also part of CD with megalencephaly and Lhermitte-Duclos disease (LDD) as the most important features. Early recognition of CD patients is important because of the increased risk of developing malignancies. Breast cancer is the most frequent malignancy, but also urogenital, digestive tract, and thyroid cancers are found with higher frequencies. CD was localised to chromosome 10q23 and the PTEN gene (also known as MMAC1 or TEP1) was shown to be involved. Germline mutations were identified in both familial and sporadic CD patients. We identified eight PTEN mutations, of which seven were novel, in 13 CD patients. Combined with previous data we have identified 17 independent CD mutations. Gross DNA alterations in CD patients were not detected. Genotype-phenotype relations are discussed. The only correlation suggested to exist is that missense mutations are not detected in LDD patients. However, larger numbers are needed to confirm this. Association of PTEN mutations and the occurrence of malignant breast disease found in an earlier study cannot be confirmed. Clinical features of five CD patients without a PTEN mutation in the coding sequence do not differ from CD patients with a PTEN mutation. Furthermore, it is likely that we have identified the majority of CD patients in the Netherlands. From this we estimate that CD has a prevalence of about 1 in 250,000 in the Dutch population with a low mutation frequency.",3 4
